=== PubMed: akne ===
1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2017 Jul;15(7):709-722. doi: 10.1111/ddg.30_13278.

Akne.

Degitz K(1), Ochsendorf F(2).

Author information:
(1)Dermatologische Gemeinschaftspraxis, München, Klinik und Poliklinik für 
Dermatologie und Allergologie der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.
(2)Klinik für Dermatologie, Venerologie und Allergologie, Universitätsklinikum, 
Frankfurt am Main.

Akne ist eine chronische Erkrankung mit hoher Prävalenz unter Jugendlichen. 
Pathogenetische Hauptfaktoren (und ihre klinischen Korrelate) sind gesteigerte 
Talgproduktion (Seborrhoe), follikuläre Hyperkeratose (Komedonen) und 
perifollikuläre Entzündungsvorgänge (Papulopusteln). Die Krankheit wird von 
endogenen (Androgene, IGF-1, neuroendokrine Faktoren) und exogenen 
(Propionibacterium acnes, Diät, mechanische Irritation, Inhaltsstoffe 
medizinischer oder kosmetischer Externa) Einflüssen moduliert. Akne geht mit zum 
Teil hoher Morbidität einher und kann bereits bei leichter Ausprägung eine 
erhebliche Verschlechterung der Lebensqualität bewirken. Zu Therapie stehen 
wirksame topische und systemische Behandlungsverfahren zur Verfügung. Eine 
optimale Behandlung erfordert eine stadiengerechtes Management und 
kontinuierliche ärztliche Begleitung der Patienten über den erforderlichen 
Behandlungszeitraum.

© 2017 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG). Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.30_13278
PMID: 28677193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2025 May;39(5):899-941. doi: 10.1111/jdv.20472. 
Epub 2024 Dec 19.

European S2k guidelines for hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa part 2: 
Treatment.

Zouboulis CC(1)(2), Bechara FG(2)(3), Benhadou F(2)(4), Bettoli V(2)(5), Bukvić 
Mokos Z(2)(6)(7), Del Marmol V(2)(4), Dolenc-Voljč M(2)(8)(9), 
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(2)(10), Grimstad Ø(2)(11)(12), Guillem P(2)(13), 
Horváth B(2)(14), Hunger RE(2)(15), Ingram JR(2)(16), Ioannidis D(2)(17), Just 
E(18), Kemény L(2)(19), Kirby B(2)(20), Liakou AI(2)(21), McGrath BM(2)(22), 
Marzano AV(23)(24), Matusiak Ł(2)(25), Molina-Leyva A(2)(26), Nassif A(2)(27), 
Podda M(2)(28), Prens EP(2)(29), Prignano F(2)(30), Raynal H(2)(31), Romanelli 
M(2)(32), Saunte DML(2)(33)(34)(35), Szegedi A(2)(36), Szepietowski JC(2)(25), 
Tzellos T(2)(11)(12), Valiukevičienė S(2)(37)(38), van der Zee HH(2)(29), van 
Straalen KR(2)(29), Villumsen B(2)(39), Jemec GBE(2)(34)(35).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Dermatology, Venereology, Allergology and Immunology, 
Staedtisches Klinikum Dessau, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor Fontane and 
Faculty of Health Sciences Brandenburg, Dessau, Germany.
(2)European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation e.V., Dessau, Germany.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, International Centre 
for Hidradenitis Suppurativa/Acne Inversa (ICH), Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, 
Germany.
(4)Dermatology Unit, Hôpitaux Unviversitaires de Bruxelles, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)HS Clinic, O.U. of Dermatology, Azienda Ospedaliera - University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(6)University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
(7)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(8)Department of Dermatovenereology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(9)Department of Dermatovenereology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(10)4th Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Athens, Greece.
(11)Department of Clinical Medicine, UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway.
(12)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, 
Norway.
(13)Department of Surgery, Clinique du Val d'Ouest, Lyon, France.
(14)Department of Dermatology, Center for Blistering Diseases, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Dermatology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University 
of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(16)Division of Infection and Immunity, Dermatology Department, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK.
(17)1st Department of Dermatology-Venereology, Aristotle University Medical 
School, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(18)Deutsche Akne Inversa Patientenvereinigung, Coesfeld, Germany.
(19)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged, 
Hungary.
(20)Charles Department of Dermatology, St Vincent's University Hospital and 
Charles Institute of Dermatology, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(21)1st Department of Dermatology-Venereology, "Andreas Sygros" Hospital for 
Venereal and Cutaneous Diseases, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens 
Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(22)HS Ireland, Hidradenitis Suppurativa Association, County Clare, Ireland.
(23)Dermatology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milan, Italy.
(24)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università Degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(25)Faculty of Medicine, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(26)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de 
las Nieves - Ibs Granada, Granada, Spain.
(27)Centre d'Infectiologie Necker-Pasteur, Institut Pasteur, Centre Médical and 
Université Paris-Cité, Paris, France.
(28)Department of Dermatology, Medical Center Klinikum Darmstadt, Teaching 
Hospital Goethe-University Frankfurt, Darmstadt, Germany.
(29)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(30)Section of Dermatology, Department of Health Sciences, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy.
(31)Solidarité Verneuil, Lyon, France.
(32)Department of Dermatology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(33)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Copenhagen University Hospital - 
Herlev-Gentofte Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark.
(34)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(35)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(36)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and Clinical Center, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
(37)Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, The Lithuanian University of 
Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(38)Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, The Hospital of Lithuanian 
University of Health Sciences Kauno klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(39)Danish HS Patients' Association, Soborg, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: This second part of the S2k guidelines is an update of the 2015 S1 
European guidelines.
OBJECTIVE: These guidelines aim to provide an accepted decision aid for the 
selection, implementation and assessment of appropriate and sufficient therapy 
for patients with hidradenitis suppurativa/acne inversa (HS).
METHODS: The chapters have been selected after a Delphi procedure among the 
experts/authors. Certain passages have been adopted without changes from the 
previous version. Potential treatment complications are not included, being 
beyond the scope of these guidelines.
RESULTS: Since the S1 guidelines publication, validation of new therapeutic 
approaches has almost completely overhauled the knowledge in the field of HS 
treatment. Inflammatory nodules/abscesses/draining tunnels are the primary 
lesions, which enable the classification of the disease severity by new 
validated tools. In relation to the degree of detectable inflammation, HS is 
classified into the inflammatory and the predominantly non-inflammatory forms. 
While the intensity of the inflammatory form can be subdivided by the IHS4 
classification in mild, moderate and severe HS and is treated by medication 
accordingly, the decision on surgical treatment of the predominantly 
non-inflammatory form is based on the Hurley stage of the affected localization. 
The effectiveness of oral tetracyclines as an alternative to the oral 
combination of clindamycin/rifampicin should be noted. The duration of systemic 
antibiotic therapy can be shortened by a 5-day intravenous clindamycin 
treatment. Adalimumab, secukinumab and bimekizumab subcutaneous administration 
has been approved by the EMA for the treatment of moderate-to-severe HS. Various 
surgical procedures are available for the predominantly non-inflammatory form of 
the disease. The combination of a medical therapy to reduce inflammation with a 
surgical procedure to remove irreversible tissue damage is currently considered 
a holistic therapeutic approach.
CONCLUSIONS: Suitable therapeutic options while considering HS severity in the 
therapeutic algorithm according to standardized criteria are aimed at ensuring a 
proper therapy.

© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of 
Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.20472
PMCID: PMC12023723
PMID: 39699926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CCZ has received advisory board and consultancy 
fees from Almirall, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Idorsia, Incyte, L'OREAL, 
MSD, NAOS‐BIODERMA, Novartis, Pfizer, PPM, Sanofi and UCB, and lecture honoraria 
from Almirall, Amgen, Biogen, Novartis, Pfizer and UCB. His departments have 
received grants from Astra Zeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, the Brandenburg Medical 
School Theodor Fontane, the EADV, the European Union, the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research, GSK, Inflarx, MSD, Novartis, Relaxera and 
UCB for his participation as clinical and research investigator. He is the 
president of the EHSF e.V., coordinator of the ALLOCATE Skin group of the ERN 
Skin and chair of the ARHS Task Force group of the EADV. He is the editor of the 
EADV News and co‐copyright holder of IHS4 on behalf of the EHSF e.V. FGB has 
received honoraria for participation in advisory boards, in clinical trials, 
and/or as a speaker from AbbVie, Acelyrin, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celltrion, Dr. 
Wolff, Incyte, Inflarx, Janssen, Merck, Mölnlycke, Moonlake, Novartis, Sanofi, 
Sitala and UCB. VB has acted as consultant, advisory board member, research 
investigator and received honoraria from AbbVie, Avene, Beiersdorf, Bioderma, 
Biogena, Difa‐Cooper, Exeltis, Galderma, Ganassini, Giuliani, GSK, ICF, Isdin, 
Leo Pharma, L'OREAL, Meda, Menarini–Relife, Mylan, Novartis, Pharcos‐Biodue, 
Pierre‐Fabre and UCB. His institution has received research support from AbbVie. 
VDM has participated as clinical investigator for AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, BMS, Incyte, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, UCB. Her 
department received grants from Almirall, BMS and Sanofi. She is the president 
of the Belgian Society of Dermatology, board member of the ESPCR and EDF, and 
chair of the EADV‐PPRC committee and the Euromelanoma skin cancer prevention 
campaign for Europe. EJG‐B reports honoraria and consultation fees from Abbott 
Products Operations, bioMérieux, Brahms GmbH, GSK and Sobi (granted to the 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens); independent educational grants 
from AbbVie, InCyte, Novartis and UCB (granted to the National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens) and from Abbott Products Operations, bioMérieux Inc., 
Johnson & Johnson, MSD and Swedish Orphan Biovitrum AB (granted to the Hellenic 
Institute for the Study of Sepsis), support for attending the HS guidelines 
meeting from the EHSF e.V., and funding from the Horizon 2020 European Grants 
ImmunoSep and RISCinCOVID and the Horizon Health grants EPIC‐CROWN‐2 and POINT 
(granted to the Hellenic Institute for the Study of Sepsis). MD‐V has received 
lecture honoraria from AbbVie, Novartis and SwixxBioPharma. PG has received 
advisory board and consultancy fees and support for attending meetings from 
AbbVie, Cicaplus, Inresa, Novartis and UCB. REH has received lecture honoraria 
from AbbVie, Galderma, Novartis, Sandoz and UCB. BH has received advisory board 
and consultancy fees from AbbVie, Akari, Argenx, Janssen, Novartis, Regeneron, 
Roche, Sanofi, UCB and HS studies support from Akari and Janssen. JRI has 
received advisory board fees, lecture honoraria and support for attending 
meetings from Abbvie, Boehringer Ingelheim, ChemoCentryx, Citryll, Insmed, 
Kymera, MoonLake, Novartis, UCB, UNION and Viela Bio. He is a co‐copyright 
holder of HiSQoL, Investigator Global Assessment and Patient Global Assessment 
instruments for HS. His department receives income from copyright of the 
Dermatology Life Quality Index and related instruments. He is officer of the 
British Association of Dermatologists 2019–2024 and has received a stipend as 
Editor‐in‐Chief of the British Journal of Dermatology 2019–2024 and an ongoing 
authorship honorarium from UpToDate. DI reports honoraria for lectures and fees 
for consultation of AbbVie, Amgen, Genesis, Jannsen, Leo Pharma, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Sanofi and UCB (granted to the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki). He 
is treasurer and committee chair of the EADV and board member of the Hellenic 
Society of Dermatology and Venereology. EJ has received consultancy fees from 
Novartis and support for attending meetings from the EHSF e.V. and Novartis. LK 
has received advisory board fees from AbbVie, BMS, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Sanofi, UCB, consultancy fees from AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, 
Incyte, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, UCB, lecture honoraria from 
AbbVie, BMS, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi and UCB, and support for 
attending meetings from AbbVie, Novartis and Sanofi. BK has received advisory 
board and consultancy fees from Abbvie, Almirall, Amgen, BMS, Celgene, Eli 
Lilly, GSK, Janssen, Leo Pharma, MC2 Therapeutics, Moonlake, Novartis, Pfizer, 
UCB, Union and has participated at a Data Safety Monitoring Board of Arctic 
Bioscience. He has received lecture honoraria from Abbvie, Almirall, BMS, 
Celgene, Eli Lilly, Janssen, Leo Pharma, MC2 Therapeutics, Moonlake, Novartis 
and UCB, and support for attending meetings from. Abbvie, Almirall, BMS, Eli 
Lilly, Janssen, Moonlake, Novartis, UCB and Union. AIL has received advisory 
board fees from Novartis, lecture honoraria and support for attending meetings 
from AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim Novartis, UCB Pharma. She is sub‐investigator 
in clinical trials of AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, Insmed, Novartis, Sanofi and 
UCB. His institution has received grants from Abbvie, Almirall, the British Skin 
Foundation, the City of Dublin Skin and Cancer Charity, the Irish Research 
Council, Janssen, Moonlake, Novartis, the Science Foundation Ireland and UCB for 
his participation as clinical and research investigator. He is member of the 
EHSF e.V. scientific committee, steering committee BADBIR and interim chair of 
the Dermatology Clinical Advisory Group, Ireland. AVM has received advisory 
board and consultancy fees, disease‐relevant lecture honoraria and support for 
attending meetings from AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Incyte, Leo 
Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, UCB. BMMG has received consultancy fees, 
honoraria and support for attending meetings from Novartis and UCB, and 
consultancy fees from Incyte. ŁM has received advisory board and consultancy 
fees from AbbVie, Leo Pharma, Novartis and UCB, and lecture honoraria from 
Almirall, AbbVie, Aristo Pharma, Janssen, Leo Pharma, Medac, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Pierre‐Fabre, La Roche‐Posay and UCB. He obtained support for attending meetings 
from AbbVie and Novartis and was investigator of RCT of AbbVie, Almirall, Amgen, 
AnaptysBio, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, Celltrion, Galderma, Helm, Incyte, 
InfraRX, Janssen, Kliniksa, Leo Pharma, Medimmune, Menlo, Merck, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Regeneron, Takeda, Teva, Trevi and UCB. He is a member of the Polish 
Dermatology Society Guideline Committee for HS. AM‐L has received advisory board 
fees, lecture honoraria and support for attending meetings from Abbvie, 
Almirall, Amgen, Novartis and UCB. MP has received advisory board fees from 
AbbVie, Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL, Galderma, Janssen, MoonLake, Novartis, 
L'OREAL and UCB, and consultancy fees from AbbVie, CSL, Galderma, Janssen, 
Novartis and UCB. He has obtained lecture honoraria and support for attending 
meetings from AbbVie, Beiersdorf, BMS, Eli Lilly, Galderma, Janssen, Leo Pharma, 
L'OREAL, Novartis, MSD and UCB. EPP has received consultancy fees from GSK, 
Janssen, MSD, Novartis, UCB and lecture honoraria from Janssen and UCB. FP has 
received advisory board and consultancy fees from AbbVie, Amgen, Almirall, BMS, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi, Takeda 
and UCB, and lecture honoraria from AbbVie, Amgen, Biogen, BMS, 
Böhringer‐Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Sanofi and UCB. MR has 
received advisory board and consultancy fees from AbbVie, BMS, Eli Lilly, 
Janssen and Sanofi. DMLS has received advisory board and consultancy fees from 
Novartis, Sanofi and UCB, and lecture honoraria from Jamjoom Pharma, Leo Pharma, 
Novartis, Sanofi and UCB. She obtained support for attending meetings from 
Novartis, Pfizer and Sanofi. She has received support for the present manuscript 
from Novartis und UCB. She is EADV Board Member, Chair of the Danish Dermatology 
Society Guideline Committee for HS, and Section Editor of Dermatology and the 
JEADV. JCS has received consultancy fees from AbbVie, Almirall, Galderma, Leo 
Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Trevi, Vifor, Sandoz and UCB, and 
lecture honoraria from AbbVie, Almirall, Janssen, Eli Lilly, Leo Pharma, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Novartis, Teva and UCB. He obtained support 
for attending meetings from Leo Pharma, Novartis, Sanofi‐Genzyme and UCB and has 
participated as clinical investigator for AbbVie, Aceleryn, Almirall, Amgen, 
AnaptysBio, Argenx, ASLAN, Biocom, Biogen, Bio‐Thera, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Celtrion, CuraTeQ, DICE, Galapagos, Galderma, Helm AG, Incyte, InfraRX, Janssen, 
Kliniksa, Leo Pharma, Medimmune, Menlo Therapeutics, Merck, Moonlake, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Regeneron, Takeda, Teva, Trevi, UCB, Uni Therapeutics and Ventyx. He is 
president of the Polish Dermatological Society. TT has received advisory board 
and consultancy fees and lecture honoraria from Abbvie, Almirall, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Novartis, Pfizer and UCB. He is the treasurer of the EHSF e.V. and 
EADV executive committee member. SV has received advisory board fees, lecture 
honoraria and support for attending meetings from Abbvie, Amgen, Johnson & 
Johnson, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche and Sanofi. She is principal 
investigator and sub‐investigator in clinical trial of Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Novartis. HHvdZ has received consultancy fees and lecture honoraria from Abbvie, 
Incyte, InflaRx, Insmed, Novartis and UCB. KRvS has received consultancy fees 
and lecture honoraria from Novartis and UCB. AS has received advisory board, 
consultancy fees and lecture honoraria from AbbVie, Eli Lilly, Janssen, 
Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi and UCB. She obtained support for attending meetings 
from AbbVie, Janssen and UCB. She is board member of European Society of 
Dermatological Research and member of the Editorial Board of JEADV. GBEJ has 
served as a consultant for AbbVie, Coloplast, InflaRx, Leo Pharma, Novartis and 
UCB, and on advisory boards for AbbVie, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, UCB and as a 
speaker for AbbVie, Coloplast, Galderma and Leo Pharma. He has served as an 
investigator for AbbVie, InflaRx, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Regeneron and UCB, and 
has received unrestricted grants from AbbVie, Leo Pharma and Novartis. He is a 
vice president of the EHSF e.V. FB, ØG, ZBM, AN, HR and BV declare no conflict 
of interest.


3. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2018 Oct;16(10):1177-1179. doi: 10.1111/ddg.13666.

Adulte Akne (Acne tarda) der Frau: Eine Herausforderung für den Dermatologen.

Zouboulis CC.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.13666
PMID: 30300483


4. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2018 Oct;16(10):1185-1196. doi: 10.1111/ddg.13664_g.

Akne bei erwachsenen Frauen: Physiologische und psychologische Erwägungen und 
Management.

Dreno B(1), Bagatin E(2), Blume-Peytavi U(3), Rocha M(2), Gollnick H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Nantes, Frankreich.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Federal University of São Paulo - UNIFESP, São 
Paulo, Brasilien.
(3)Klinik für Dermatologie, Venerologie und Allergologie, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin.
(4)Klinik für Dermatologie und Venerologie, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, 
Magdeburg.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.13664_g
PMID: 30300500


5. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2020 Dec;18(12):1426-1436. doi: 10.1111/ddg.14338_g.

Assoziation hypertropher Post-Akne-Narben mit Einzelnukleotid-Polymorphismus 
(rs243865) im Matrix-Metalloproteinase-2-Gen.

[Article in German]

Gupta N(1), Bishnoi A(2), Mathew D(1), Arora A(2), Handa S(2), Kaur J(1), De 
D(2), Pal A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Leprology, Postgraduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.

HINTERGRUND UND ZIEL: Bei Akne wurde eine abweichende Gewebeexpression von 
Matrix-Metalloproteinasen beobachtet. Ziel unserer Studie war es, die Bedeutung 
von Polymorphismen einzelner Nukleotide (single nucleotide polymorphisms, SNPs) 
in MMP-2 (-1306 C/T, rs243865) und TIMP-2 (-418 G/C, rs8179090) bei Akne und 
Post-Akne-Narben zu untersuchen.
PATIENTEN UND METHODEN: 512 Patienten (169 mit Akne ohne Narbenbildung, 319 mit 
atrophen Aknenarben, 24 mit hypertrophen Aknenarben) und 161 gleichaltrige 
Kontrollen wurden nach Erhalt der schriftlichen Einwilligungserklärung aus der 
Ambulanz der Hautklinik in die Studie aufgenommen. Zur Genotypisierung mittels 
Polymerasekettenreaktion-Restriktionsfragmentlängenpolymorphismus (PCR-RFLP) 
wurde venöses Blut (5 ml) entnommen. Der Schweregrad von Akne und Akne-bedingter 
Narbenbildung wurde bestimmt.
ERGEBNISSE: Männer hatten ein deutlich erhöhtes Risiko schwere Akne (p = 0,012), 
Akne außerhalb des Gesichts (p = 0,047) und Aknenarben außerhalb des Gesichts 
(p = 0,0001) zu entwickeln. Entzündliche Akne korrelierte positiv mit dem 
Schweregrad der Narbenbildung (p = 0,001). Die Wahrscheinlichkeit für die 
Bildung hypertropher Narben war bei Personen mit homozygotem CC-Genotyp von 
MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) gegenüber Kontrollen nicht verändert (Faktor 1,0; p = 0,05; 95 
%-KI: 0,7-1,6), jedoch gegenüber Personen mit Akne ohne Narbenbildung um den 
Faktor 7,8 (p = 0,047; 95 %-KI: 1,0-59,9) und gegenüber Personen mit atrophen 
Narben um den Faktor 8,2 (p = 0,041; 95 %-KI: 1,1-59,9) erhöht.
SCHLUSSFOLGERUNGEN: Es wurde eine signifikante Assoziation zwischen der Bildung 
hypertropher Post-Akne-Narben und dem CC-Genotyp von MMP-2 (-1306 C/T) 
beobachtet.

© 2020 Deutsche Dermatologische Gesellschaft (DDG). Published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ddg.14338_g
PMID: 33373159