=== PubMed: bipolar bozukluk ===
1. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2014 Spring;25(1):50-9.

[Creativity and bipolar disorder].

[Article in Turkish]

Maçkalı Z, Gülöksüz S, Oral T.

The relationship between creativity and bipolar disorder has been an intriguing 
topic since ancient times. Early studies focused on describing characteristics 
of creative people. From the last quarter of the twentieth century, researchers 
began to focus on the relationship between mood disorders and creativity. 
Initially, the studies were based on biographical texts and the obtained results 
indicated a relationship between these two concepts. The limitations of the 
retrospective studies led the researchers to develop systematic investigations 
into this area. The systematic studies that have focused on artistic creativity 
have examined both the prevalence of mood disorders and the creative process. In 
addition, a group of researchers addressed the relationship in terms of 
affective temperaments. Through the end of the 90's, the scope of creativity was 
widened and the notion of everyday creativity was proposed. The emergence of 
this notion led researchers to investigate the associations of the creative 
process in ordinary (non-artist) individuals. In this review, the descriptions 
of creativity and creative process are mentioned. Also, the creative process is 
addressed with regards to bipolar disorder. Then, the relationship between 
creativity and bipolar disorder are evaluated in terms of aforementioned studies 
(biographical, systematic, psychobiographical, affective temperaments). In 
addition, a new model, the "Shared Vulnerability Model" which was developed to 
explain the relationship between creativity and psychopathology is introduced. 
Finally, the methodological limitations and the suggestions for resolving these 
limitations are included.

PMID: 24590850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2007 Spring;18(1):59-71.

[Comorbid anxiety disorders in bipolar disorder patients: a review].

[Article in Turkish]

Tamam L(1).

Author information:
(1)Cukurova U Tip Fak., Psikiyatri AD., Adana, Turkey. ltamam@mail.cu.edu.tr

In recent years, a growing number of clinical and epidemiological studies have 
reported high rates of comorbid anxiety disorder in patients with bipolar 
disorder. These studies have stated that comorbid anxiety disorder in bipolar 
patients is the rule rather than the exception. Lifetime anxiety disorder 
comorbidity rates among bipolar disorder patients are estimated to be between 
24% and 93%, based on several different clinical and epidemiological studies. 
Bipolar patients usually are diagnosed with comorbid multiple anxiety disorders 
rather than a single one. Anxiety disorder comorbidity is associated with 
greater psychopathology, decreased treatment response, poor outcome, and 
increased suicidality. Current prevalent treatment approaches almost always give 
priority to the symptomatic treatment of bipolar episodes, which inevitably 
influences the provision of adequate attention and care to the diagnosis and 
treatment of a comorbid anxiety disorder. This approach has important 
therapeutic and clinical implications, such as delays in treatment leading to 
resistance to drugs and severe functional losses. Therefore, the treating 
psychiatrist needs to carefully evaluate, diagnose, and treat comorbid anxiety 
disorders in the early stages to avoid any unpleasant consequences and to 
improve the quality of life of patients. In this paper, an overview of comorbid 
anxiety disorder in bipolar disorders is presented, with a special emphasis on 
its prevalence, its relationship to sociodemographic and clinical variables, and 
possible therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 17364269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Turkiye Parazitol Derg. 2021 Dec 2;45(4):241-246. doi: 
10.4274/tpd.galenos.2021.68077.

An Investigation into the Association Between Toxoplasma gondii Infection and 
Bipolar Disorder.

[Article in English]

Şirin MC(1), Kılıç F(2), Demirdaş A(2), Arıdoğan B(1), Sesli Çetin E(1).

Author information:
(1)Süleyman Demirel University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Isparta, Turkey
(2)Süleyman Demirel University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, 
Isparta, Turkey

OBJECTIVE: Studies have implicated Toxoplasma gondii in the etiology of mental 
disorders because of its neurotropic nature and its ability to modulate 
neurotransmitter pathways. This study aims to investigate T. gondii 
seroprevalence in patients with bipolar disorder and in healthy controls living 
in the Isparta Region of Turkey and to assess the probable relationship between 
T. gondii and bipolar disorder.
METHODS: Fourty-eight patients with bipolar disorder and 50 healthy controls 
were included in the study. Sociodemographic data, possible risk factors for T. 
gondii infection and clinical characteristics were analyzed. Serum anti-T. 
gondii IgM and IgG antibody levels were measured by using chemiluminescence 
immunoassay method (Roche Cobas e601 analyzer, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, 
Germany).
RESULTS: Anti-T. gondii IgG seropositivity rates were determined as 18.8% and 
20% in the patient group and the control group, respectively. No statistically 
significant relationship was observed between T. gondii IgG seropositivity and 
bipolar disorder (p=0.876). In the study population, advanced age, low education 
level, living in a rural region and consumption of unwashed raw vegetable or 
fruit were found to be the significant risk factors for T. gondii infection 
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our preliminary findings do not support the hypothesis that T. 
gondii infection is related to bipolar disorder. However, further studies would 
require larger sample sizes to confirm our results.

Publisher: AMAÇ: Toxoplasma gondii’nin nörotropik yapısı ve nörotransmitter 
yolaklarını modüle etme yeteneği nedeniyle ruhsal bozuklukların etiyolojisinde 
rol oynadığı öne sürülmüştür. Bu çalışmanın amacı, Türkiye’de Isparta 
Bölgesi’nde yaşayan bipolar bozukluğu olan hastalarda ve sağlıklı kontrollerde 
T. gondii seroprevalansını araştırmak ve T. gondii ile bipolar bozukluk 
arasındaki olası ilişkiyi değerlendirmektir.
YÖNTEMLER: Çalışmaya bipolar bozukluğu olan 48 hasta ve 50 sağlıklı kontrol 
dahil edildi. Sosyo-demografik veriler, T. gondii enfeksiyonu için olası risk 
faktörleri ve klinik özellikler analiz edildi. Serum anti-T.gondii IgM ve IgG 
antikor seviyeleri kemilüminesans immunoassay yöntemi (Roche Cobas e601, Roche 
Diagnostics, Mannheim, Almanya) kullanılarak ölçüldü.
BULGULAR: Anti-T.gondii IgG seropozitiflik oranları hasta grubunda ve kontrol 
grubunda sırasıyla %18,8 ve %20 olarak belirlendi. T. gondii IgG seropozitifliği 
ile bipolar bozukluk arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı bir ilişki gözlenmedi 
(p=0,876). Çalışma popülasyonunda, ileri yaş, düşük eğitim düzeyi, kırsal 
bölgede yaşama ve yıkanmamış çiğ sebze veya meyve tüketimi T. gondii enfeksiyonu 
için anlamlı risk faktörleri olarak bulundu (p<0,05).
SONUÇ: Bulgularımız, T. gondii enfeksiyonunun bipolar bozuklukla ilişkili olduğu 
hipotezini desteklememektedir. Sonuçlarımızın doğrulanması için daha büyük 
örneklemlere sahip çalışmalara ihtiyaç bulunmaktadır.

DOI: 10.4274/tpd.galenos.2021.68077
PMID: 34889189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2014 Spring;25(1):1-8.

[A neuropsychological comparison of bipolar disorder and adult attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder].

[Article in Turkish]

Levent N, Tümkaya S, Ateşçi F, Tüysüzoğlu H, Varma G, Oğuzhanoğlu N.

AIM: The present study aimed to compare cognitive signs of bipolar disorder 
patients with that of adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
patients.
METHOD: The study comprised 66 bipolar disorder patients, 63 ADHD patients, and 
58 healthy controls.Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis-I Disorders 
(SCID-I), Wender Utah Rating Scale, and Adult Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Rating Scale were performed in all subjects, whereas bipolar disorder patients 
underwent additional Hamilton Depression Rating Scale and Young Mania Rating 
Scale. Subsequently, all participants underwent cognitive assessment including 
Digit Ordering Test, Verbal Memory Process Test, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and 
Stroop Test.
RESULTS: Bipolar disorder, ADHD and control groups did not differ significantly 
from each other with regard to age, sex and duration of education. Bipolar 
patients displayed poorer performance in Digit Span Test, Verbal Memory Process 
Test, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and Stroop Test as compared to the control 
group. ADHD patients were worse than the control subjects in Stroop Test 
(subtest of difference in times). Bipolar disorder patients were poorer than 
ADHD patients in cognitive tests except for Stroop Test.
CONCLUSION: In general, bipolar disorder patients have much more severe 
cognitive impairment than ADHD patients in terms of verbal memory and executive 
functions. The results supports the idea of bipolar disorder and ADHD are 
different, at least in terms of cognitive performance.

PMID: 24590844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2018 Summer;29(2):79-86.

[Phenotypic Variants of Paraoxonase Q192R in Bipolar Disorder,Depression and 
Schizophrenia].

[Article in Turkish]

Atagün Mİ, Tunç S, Alışık M, Erel Ö.

OBJECTIVE: Activity of the paraoxonase 1 (PON1) enzyme varies prominently 
according to the PON1 Q192R genotype. The arginine (R) genotype hydrolyzes 
peroxided lipids more quickly and efficiently than the glutamine (Q) genotype. 
The Q phenotype suggests greater liability to neurodegenerative processes, 
cardiovascular and malignancy risks than the R phenotype. Stimulated PON/ARES 
ratio is associated with the PON1 Q192R polymorphism. This study aimes to assess 
the Q192R phenotype in schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and depression.
METHOD: Patients with schizophrenia (37), bipolar disorder (n=50), depression 
(n=43) and healthy volunteers (n=43) were enrolled. Serum PON1, stimulated 
paraoxonase (sPON) and aryl esterase (ARES) levels were assessed with an 
automatic analyzer. Clusters of sPON/ARES ratio were detected with frequency 
analysis in PON1. QQ, QR and RR variant groups.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the bipolar disorder, 
depression, schizophrenia and healthy volunteer groups in terms of phenotype 
frequencies in groups (Fisher's Exact Coefficient=18.96, p=0.003). A higher 
prevalence of the PON1 RR variant was found in bipolar disorder whereas the PON1 
QQ variant had a higher prevalence in depression and schizophrenia as compared 
to others. Serum PON1 activity correlated with number of episodes in the bipolar 
disorder group and with SANS, SAPS scores in the schizophrenia group.
CONCLUSION: Difference between bipolar disorder, schizophrenia and depression in 
PON1 activity and PON1 phenotype might be suggestive of different liability to 
lipid peroxidation and neurodegeneration between the diagnostic groups. 
Longitudinal studies may identify long term differences between PON1 Q192R 
polymorphisms in clinical outcomes and neuropathology.

PMID: 30215835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]