=== PubMed: boğmaca ===
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2023 Apr;57(2):171-187. doi: 10.5578/mb.20239914.

[Evaluation of Pertussis Antibody Levels (Anti-PT IgG-Anti-FHA IgG) and 
Associated Factors in Maternal and Cord Blood].

[Article in Turkish]

Erik HE(1), Fadıloğlu E(2), Hasçelik AG(3), Akın L(1).

Author information:
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Public Health, 
Ankara, Türkiye.
(2)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, Ankara, Türkiye.
(3)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and 
Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Türkiye.

Pertussis has a very high mortality and morbidity rate in early infancy. There 
are many strategies to protect babies from pertussis, maternal immunization is 
one of them. In this study, it was aimed to evaluate pertussis toxin 
immunoglobulin G (anti-PT IgG) and filamentous hemagglutinin immunoglobulin G 
(anti-FHA IgG) levels of pertussis antibody in maternal and cord blood samples 
and also to evaluate the factors that may be associated with maternal antibody 
positivity. This descriptive study was conducted between 1 July and 31 October 
2020. In the study, anti PT IgG and anti-FHA IgG levels were investigated by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method in 154 maternal and 154 cord 
blood samples. Microbiological analyzes were performed in Hacettepe University 
Faculty of Medicine Central Laboratory and results of 10 IU/mL and above were 
considered positive. Factors that could affect antibody positivity were 
questioned with the data collection form. "Package for Social Sciences (SPSS)" 
package program version 25.0 was used for statistical analysis of the data. 
Chi-square and Fisher's exact tests were used for statistical analysis of 
categorical variables. Continuous numerical variables were analyzed with the 
Pearson correlation test. Logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate the 
factors affecting positivity. The natural logarithm of the continuous variables 
was taken to ensure their conformity to the normal distribution, and conformity 
to the normal distribution was evaluated with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The 
results were presented at a 95% confidence interval, at a significance level of 
p<0.05. The mean age of the mothers included in the study was 30. Of newborn 
babies, 52.6% were girls and 98.7% had normal birth weights. Of deliveries, 
95.5% were term and 82.5% were cesarean section. Anti-PT IgG positivity and 
anti-FHA IgG positivity in maternal blood were 18.8% and 48.1%, respectively. 
Anti-PT IgG and anti-FHA IgG positivity in cord blood samples were 38.3% and 
55.8%, respectively. Anti-PT IgG positivity was 2.6 times higher in mothers who 
had healthcare worker relatives compared to those who did not. Anti-FHA IgG 
positivity was 3.2 times higher in mothers aged 25 and younger than in mothers 
aged 26- 35. In addition, mothers aged 36 and over were 4.4 times more anti-FHA 
IgG positive than the mothers aged 26-35. Anti-FHA IgG antibody positivity was 
found 7.3 times more in those living in extended families than those living in 
nuclear families. Anti-PT IgG and anti-FHA IgG levels in maternal and cord blood 
samples were highly positively correlated. Mothers in the study had low 
pertussis antibody levels, indicating that newborns are at risk for infection. 
Maternal immunization with pertussis-containing vaccine is the most appropriate 
and cost-effective strategy to protect the newborn against pertussis. Many 
countries have been using pertussis-containing vaccines in maternal immunization 
safely for many years. Replacing the tetanus-diphtheria vaccine (Td), which is 
included in the routine pregnancy immunization program in Türkiye, with 
tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis (Tdap) may be appropriate to protect the mother and 
newborns from pertussis infection.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20239914
PMID: 37067204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2025 Apr;59(2):132-144. doi: 10.5578/mb.202502140.

[Evaluation of Pertussis Cases in Our Hospital: Five-Year Analysis].

[Article in Turkish]

Yakut S(1), Ulaba A(1), Yildiz Zeyrek F(1).

Author information:
(1)Harran Üniversitesi Tıp Fakültesi, Tıbbi Mikrobiyoloji Anabilim Dalı, 
Şanlıurfa.

This study aimed to evaluate the demographic characteristics, seasonal 
distribution, clinical features, vaccination status and mortality rates of 
patients with Bordetella pertussis/parapertussis detected in our hospital 
between January 2019 and June 2024. Nasopharyngeal swab samples obtained using 
eSwab (Flocked swab, Copan Diagnostics, Italy) from patients who applied to our 
hospital with the complaints of upper/lower respiratory tract infection between 
January 2019 and June 2024 were tested in viral transport medium in our 
hospital’s microbiology laboratory using Film Array multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction (BioFire, bioMérieux Diagnostics, France) device in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s recommendations and the results were evaluated. Demographic 
characteristics of the patients, presenting complaints, follow-up in outpatient 
clinic/ward/intensive care unit, agents detected in nasopharyngeal samples, need 
for mechanical ventilation, vaccination status and recovery/death status were 
obtained from the Hospital Information Management System. In this study, 
B.pertussis was detected in 34 patients and B.parapertussis in 13 patients. Six 
of the patients were adults, 41 were in the pediatric age group and half of the 
pediatric age group (n= 20) were younger than six months. Vaccination 
information could not be obtained for six patients. Eighteen patients were 
unvaccinated, 17 were fully vaccinated for their age and six were incompletely 
vaccinated. While only five patients were detected during the coronavirus 
disease-2019 pandemic, 42 patients were detected in the post-pandemic period. It 
is particularly noteworthy that 20 cases were seen in the first six months of 
2024. Eight patients in the pediatric age group were followed up in intensive 
care and four of them were younger than six months. In adult patients, three 
patients were followed up in intensive care and two were of advanced age (66 and 
70 years). Eight of the patients admitted to the ICU required mechanical 
ventilation and five of these patients (three under six months, two two years 
old) died. In three of the patients who died, the causative agent was 
B.pertussis and they were unvaccinated and in two patients, the causative agent 
was B.parapertussis, one of these patients was unvaccinated and the other had 
four doses of the vaccine. As a result, it was determined that there was a 
significant increase in pertussis cases compared to the years, the number of 
cases doubled in the first six months of 2024 compared to the previous year, 
mortality increased especially in young children and infants, and most severe 
cases were unvaccinated. In addition, the loss of two out of 13 cases with 
B.parapertussis showed that infections due to B.parapertussis can also be severe 
and fatal. Besides, only one of the patients with B.parapertussis was 
unvaccinated, suggesting that the vaccine against B.pertussis does not provide 
cross-protection against B.parapertussis.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.202502140
PMID: 40277262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2007 Apr;41(2):165-73.

[Development studies of lyophilized standard diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis 
vaccines].

[Article in Turkish]

Ozcengiz E(1), Unver D, Cayan HH, Atakan Ablay P, Kanik E.

Author information:
(1)erozcengiz@yahoo.com

In this study, diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis vaccine components were 
prepared as the formulations of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP), 
diphtheria-tetanus (DT) for children, diphtheria-tetanus (Td) for adults, and 
tetanus toxoid (TT), respectively. Alhydrogel-adsorbed vaccines prepared to 
contain the stabilizing substances were lyophilized and the immunogenicity tests 
were carried out both in vivo and in vitro. The potencies of the tetanus 
component of the vaccines were obtained by the lethal challenge test in mice. 
The values were found as 144.86 IU/ml for lyophilized adsorbed (LA)-DTP, 116.5 
IU/ml for LA-DT, 98.25 IU/ml for LA-Td and 96.2 IU/ml for LA-TT. Anti-tetanus 
IgG and anti-diphteria IgG levels determined by ELISA method were found high in 
the sera taken from the mice immunized with the above-mentioned vaccines. 
Anti-B.pertussis fimbria IgG antibody levels were also high by both ELISA and 
microagglutination tests. The test preparations were then compared to adsorbed 
liquid vaccines and it was shown that the components were quite stable in the 
lyophilized formulations. It was concluded that the formulations prepared in 
this study can be used as standard vaccines after being calibrated against World 
Health Organization standards.

PMID: 17682702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2004 Oct;38(4):393-408.

[Approach to the diagnosis of pertussis infection: evaluation of cases suffering 
from prolonged cough symptoms].

[Article in Turkish]

Dağlar E(1), Nar S, Tanir G, Akbaş E, Zorlu P, Esen B.

Author information:
(1)Dr. Sami Ulus Cocuk Sağliği ve Hastaliklari Eğitim ve Araştirma Merkezi, 
Ankara.

This study was performed on cases admitted to Sami Ulus Pediatric Health and 
Diseases Training and Research Hospital because of cough lasting two weeks or 
more between November, 2001 and April, 2003. According to pertussis case 
definitions, patient's information of each 66 probable cases complied with 
clinical criteria from 0-15 age group were recorded on questionnaire and 
nasopharyngeal samples were taken. Specimens were sent to Refik Saydam National 
Hygiene Centre, Pertussis Reference Laboratory in order to perform specific 
culture, direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Bordetella pertussis was isolated on cultures of two cases (3%) and the same 
specimens were found positive by DFA. Direct PCR results of nasopharyngeal 
samples were not evaluated since false positive reactions were obtained with one 
or more negative controls in different series. Since a symptomatic contact of 
any culture proven case is also defined as confirmed case by the standard case 
definitions, three of 66 cases (4.5%) together with a symptomatic contact of one 
of the culture positives were classified as confirmed pertussis in this study.

PMID: 15700665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2007 Apr;41(2):175-83.

[A field survey carried out on the confirmation of a pertussis case in a village 
of Kirikkale Province, Turkey].

[Article in Turkish]

Coplü N(1), Nar S, Efsun A, Kurtoğlu D, Esen B.

Author information:
(1)nilaycoplu@yahoo.com

The aim of this study was to evaluate the existence and the rate of pertussis 
infection in December 2002 among the symptomatic contacts in Konurhaciobasi 
village of Kirikkale province (placed in middle Anatolia, Turkey, with a 
population of 500 people), where a laboratory-confirmed pertussis case was 
defined by culture positivity. Sixty contacts with cough history of more than 
two weeks have been interviewed and their nasopharyngeal swabs have been 
collected together with the serum samples from 47 of them. "Probable case" 
definition included cough lasting longer than two weeks together with at least 
one of the following symptoms: paroxysms of cough, inspiratory "whooping" and 
post-tussive vomiting without other apparent cause. The samples were inoculated 
onto cephalexin Bordet-Gengou agar (C-BGA), and following the growth of 
suspected colonies identification tests including slide agglutination by using 
Bordetella pertussis phase 1 and B.parapertussis specific antisera, were 
performed. IgG antibodies against B.pertussis were searched with an in-house 
ELISA method by using purified pertussis toxin, and titers of > or = 100 ELISA 
units (EU)/ml were considered as acute/recent infection. Among the subjects 80% 
were children and 75% were female. Thirty-six subjects (76.6%) had a history of 
immunization with 3-4 doses of diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT) vaccine. 
According to questionnaires the mean household number was calculated as 5.0 +/- 
0.26. Fifteen contacts (age range: 4-12 years, 11 were female) were defined as 
"probable cases", however all of them were found to be culture negative. All 
these cases had been vaccinated with DPT vaccine. Among the probable cases 12 
serum samples were available, and six of them were evaluated as acute/recent 
pertussis infection, since their antibody titers were found as > or = 100 EU/ml. 
In addition, the evaluation of ELISA results of 47 individuals indicated that 27 
of them had antibody titers of > or = 100 EU/ml, who could be considered as 
acute or recent pertussis infection. The data of this field survey indicated a 
possible pertussis outbreak in this village.

PMID: 17682703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]