=== PubMed: Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever ===
1. Med Mal Infect. 2019 Nov;49(8):574-585. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.09.005.
Epub  2019 Oct 10.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever: An update.

Fillâtre P(1), Revest M(2), Tattevin P(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de réanimation polyvalente, centre hospitalier St-Brieuc, 10, rue 
Marcel-Proust, 22000 St-Brieuc, France. Electronic address: 
pierre.fillatre@ch-stbrieuc.fr.
(2)Service des maladies infectieuses et de réanimation médicale, CHU de Rennes, 
Rennes, France.

Erratum in
    Med Mal Infect. 2020 Feb;50(1):95-96. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.11.004.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a severe form of hemorrhagic fever 
caused by a virus of the genus Nairovirus. The amplifying hosts are various 
mammal species that remain asymptomatic. Humans are infected by tick bites or 
contact with animal blood. CCHF has a broad geographic distribution and is 
endemic in Africa, Asia (in particular the Middle East) and South East Europe. 
This area has expanded in recent years with two indigenous cases reported in 
Spain in 2016 and 2018. The incubation period is short with the onset of 
symptoms in generally less than a week. The initial symptoms are common to other 
infectious syndromes with fever, headache, myalgia and gastrointestinal 
symptoms. The hemorrhagic syndrome occurs during a second phase with sometimes 
major bleeding in and from the mucous membranes and the skin. Strict barrier 
precautionary measures are required to prevent secondary and nosocomial spread. 
CCHF may be documented by PCR detection of the virus genome during the first 
days after the onset of illness, and then by serological testing for IgM 
antibodies as from the 2nd week after infection. Patient management is mainly 
based on supportive care. Despite a few encouraging retrospective reports, there 
is no confirmed evidence that supports the use of ribavirin for curative 
treatment. Nevertheless, the World Health Organization continues to recommend 
the use of ribavirin to treat CCHF, considering the limited medical risk related 
to short-term treatment. The prescription of ribavirin should however be 
encouraged post-exposure for medical professionals, to prevent secondary 
infection.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2019.09.005
PMID: 31607406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Emerg Infect Dis. 2023 Feb;29(2):252-259. doi: 10.3201/eid2902.220677.

Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever, Spain, 2013-2021.

Lorenzo Juanes HM, Carbonell C, Sendra BF, López-Bernus A, Bahamonde A, Orfao A, 
Lista CV, Ledesma MS, Negredo AI, Rodríguez-Alonso B, Bua BR, Sánchez-Seco MP, 
Muñoz Bellido JL, Muro A, Belhassen-García M.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a viral infectious disease for which 
distribution of the main vector, Hyalomma spp. ticks, is expanding. We analyzed 
all 10 cases of CCHF diagnosed in Spain during 2013-2021; case-patient median 
age was 56.5 years, and 7 were men. We identified CCHF virus genotypes III and 
V. Six case-patients acquired the infection in urban areas. Sixty percent of 
patients were infected in summer and 40% in spring. Two patients met criteria 
for hemophagocytic syndrome. Seven patients survived. The epidemiologic pattern 
of CCHF in Spain is based on occasional cases with an elevated mortality rate. 
Genotype III and, to a less extent also genotype V, CCHF circulates in humans in 
a common geographic area in Spain. Those data suggest that the expansion 
pathways are complex and may change over time. Physicians should remain alert to 
the possibility of new CCHF cases.

DOI: 10.3201/eid2902.220677
PMCID: PMC9881766
PMID: 36692301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Antiviral Res. 2013 Oct;100(1):159-89. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.07.006. 
Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever: history, epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical 
syndrome and genetic diversity.

Bente DA(1), Forrester NL, Watts DM, McAuley AJ, Whitehouse CA, Bray M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX 77555, United States. Electronic address: 
dabente@utmb.edu.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is the most important tick-borne viral 
disease of humans, causing sporadic cases or outbreaks of severe illness across 
a huge geographic area, from western China to the Middle East and southeastern 
Europe and throughout most of Africa. CCHFV is maintained in vertical and 
horizontal transmission cycles involving ixodid ticks and a variety of wild and 
domestic vertebrates, which do not show signs of illness. The virus circulates 
in a number of tick genera, but Hyalomma ticks are the principal source of human 
infection, probably because both immature and adult forms actively seek hosts 
for the blood meals required at each stage of maturation. CCHF occurs most 
frequently among agricultural workers following the bite of an infected tick, 
and to a lesser extent among slaughterhouse workers exposed to the blood and 
tissues of infected livestock and medical personnel through contact with the 
body fluids of infected patients. CCHFV is the most genetically diverse of the 
arboviruses, with nucleotide sequence differences among isolates ranging from 
20% for the viral S segment to 31% for the M segment. Viruses with diverse 
sequences can be found within the same geographic area, while closely related 
viruses have been isolated in far distant regions, suggesting that widespread 
dispersion of CCHFV has occurred at times in the past, possibly by ticks carried 
on migratory birds or through the international livestock trade. Reassortment 
among genome segments during co-infection of ticks or vertebrates appears to 
have played an important role in generating diversity, and represents a 
potential future source of novel viruses. In this article, we first review 
current knowledge of CCHFV, summarizing its molecular biology, maintenance and 
transmission, epidemiology and geographic range. We also include an extensive 
discussion of CCHFV genetic diversity, including maps of the range of the virus 
with superimposed phylogenetic trees. We then review the features of CCHF, 
including the clinical syndrome, diagnosis, treatment, pathogenesis, vaccine 
development and laboratory animal models of CCHF. The paper ends with a 
discussion of the possible future geographic range of the virus. For the benefit 
of researchers, we include a Supplementary Table listing all published reports 
of CCHF cases and outbreaks in the English-language literature, plus some 
principal articles in other languages, with total case numbers, case fatality 
rates and all CCHFV strains on GenBank.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.07.006
PMID: 23906741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Lab Med. 2015 Summer;46(3):180-9. doi: 10.1309/LMN1P2FRZ7BKZSCO.

Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever.

Shayan S(1), Bokaean M(2), Shahrivar MR(3), Chinikar S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zahedan, Iran sarashayaan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical 
Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(3)Arboviruses and Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers Laboratory (National Reference 
Laboratory), Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran.

Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a member of the Bunyaviridae 
family and Nairovirus genus. The viral genome consists of 3 RNA segments of 12 
kb (L), 6.8 kb (M), and 3 kb (S). Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is the 
most widespread tickborne viral infection worldwide: it has been reported in 
many regions of Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. The geographical distribution 
of CCHFV corresponds most closely with the distribution of members of the tick 
genera, and Hyalomma ticks are the principal source of human infection. In 
contrast to human infection, CCHFV infection is asymptomatic in all species. 
Treatment options for CCHF are limited; immunotherapy and ribavirin are 
effective in the treatment of CCHF; the efficacy of ribavirin in the treatment 
of CCHF has not yet been proven. This article reviews the history, epidemiology, 
clinical symptoms, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of CCHFV, as well as 
the development of a vaccine against it.

DOI: 10.1309/LMN1P2FRZ7BKZSCO
PMID: 26199256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Antiviral Res. 2022 Mar;199:105244. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2022.105244. Epub
 2022 Jan 11.

Immunobiology of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever.

Rodriguez SE(1), Hawman DW(2), Sorvillo TE(3), O'Neal TJ(4), Bird BH(5), 
Rodriguez LL(6), Bergeron É(7), Nichol ST(4), Montgomery JM(4), Spiropoulou 
CF(4), Spengler JR(8).

Author information:
(1)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of 
Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, 
USA; Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Virology, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural 
Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(3)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of 
Microbiology & Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, 
USA; Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, TX, USA; One Health Institute, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
(5)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; One Health 
Institute, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA.
(6)Foreign Animal Disease Research Unit, Plum Island Animal Disease Center, 
Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Orient 
Point, New York, USA.
(7)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of 
Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia.
(8)Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and 
Pathology, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia. Electronic 
address: JSpengler@cdc.gov.

Human infection with Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), a tick-borne 
pathogen in the family Nairoviridae, can result in a spectrum of outcomes, 
ranging from asymptomatic infection through mild clinical signs to severe or 
fatal disease. Studies of CCHFV immunobiology have investigated the relationship 
between innate and adaptive immune responses with disease severity, attempting 
to elucidate factors associated with differential outcomes. In this article, we 
begin by highlighting unanswered questions, then review current efforts to 
answer them. We discuss in detail current clinical studies and research in 
laboratory animals on CCHF, including immune targets of infection and adaptive 
and innate immune responses. We summarize data about the role of the immune 
response in natural infections of animals and humans and experimental studies in 
vitro and in vivo and from evaluating immune-based therapies and vaccines, and 
present recommendations for future research.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2022.105244
PMCID: PMC9245446
PMID: 35026307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: no 
reported conflicts.