=== PubMed: demir eksikliği ===
1. Turk J Haematol. 2015 Mar 5;32(1):1-14. doi: 10.4274/tjh.2014.0288.

Iron-refractory iron deficiency anemia.

Yılmaz Keskin E(1), Yenicesu İ.

Author information:
(1)Samsun Education and Research Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric Hematology and 
Oncology, Samsun, Turkey. E-mail: ebruyilmaz81@hotmail.com.

Iron is essential for life because it is indispensable for several biological 
reactions, such as oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, and cell proliferation. Over 
the past few years, our understanding of iron metabolism and its regulation has 
changed dramatically. New disorders of iron metabolism have emerged, and the 
role of iron as a cofactor in other disorders has begun to be recognized. The 
study of genetic conditions such as hemochromatosis and iron-refractory iron 
deficiency anemia (IRIDA) has provided crucial insights into the molecular 
mechanisms controlling iron homeostasis. In the future, these advances may be 
exploited to improve treatment of both genetic and acquired iron disorders. 
IRIDA is caused by mutations in TMPRSS6, the gene encoding matriptase-2, which 
downregulates hepcidin expression under conditions of iron deficiency. The 
typical features of this disorder are hypochromic, microcytic anemia with a very 
low mean corpuscular volume of erythrocytes, low transferrin saturation, no (or 
inadequate) response to oral iron, and only a partial response to parenteral 
iron. In contrast to classic iron deficiency anemia, serum ferritin levels are 
usually low-normal, and serum or urinary hepcidin levels are inappropriately 
high for the degree of anemia. Although the number of cases reported thus far in 
the literature does not exceed 100, this disorder is considered the most common 
of the "atypical" microcytic anemias. The aim of this review is to share the 
current knowledge on IRIDA and increase awareness in this field.

Publisher: Demir, oksijenin taşınması, DNA sentezi ve hücre çoğalması gibi 
çeşitli biyolojik reaksiyonlar için vazgeçilmez olduğundan, yaşam için 
zorunludur. Demir metabolizması ve bu elementin düzenlenmesiyle ilgili 
bilgilerimiz, son yıllarda belirgin şekilde değişmiştir. Demir metabolizması ile 
ilgili yeni bozukluklar tanımlanmış ve demirin başka bozuklukların kofaktörü 
olduğu anlaşılmaya başlamıştır. Hemokromatozis ve demir tedavisine dirençli 
demir eksikliği anemisi (IRIDA; “iron-refractory iron deficiency anemia”) gibi 
genetik durumlar üzerinde yapılan çalışmalar, vücuttaki demir dengesini kontrol 
eden moleküler mekanizmalar ile ilgili önemli ipuçları sunmuştur. Bu 
ilerlemeler, gelecekte, hem genetik hem de kazanılmış demir bozukluklarının daha 
etkili şekilde tedavi edilmesi amacıyla kullanılabilir. IRIDA, demir eksikliği 
ile giden durumlarda, hepsidin üretimini baskılayan matriptaz-2’yi kodlayan 
TMPRSS6 genindeki mutasyonlardan kaynaklanmaktadır. Hastalığın tipik 
özellikleri, hipokrom, mikrositer anemi, çok düşük ortalama eritrosit hacmi, 
oral demir tedavisine yanıtsızlık (veya yetersiz yanıt) ve parenteral demire 
kısmi yanıttır. Klasik demir eksikliği anemisinin aksine, serum ferritin değeri 
genellikle hafif düşük ya da normal aralıkta; serum ve idrar hepsidin değerleri 
ise, aneminin derecesi ile orantısız şekilde yüksek bulunur. Şimdiye kadar 
literatürde bildirilmiş olguların sayısı 100’ü geçmediği halde, IRIDA’nın, 
“atipik” mikrositik anemilerin en sık nedeni olduğu düşünülmektedir. Bu 
derlemenin amacı, IRIDA hakkındaki güncel bilgileri araştırıcılar ile paylaşmak 
ve bu alandaki farkındalıklarını arttırmaktır.

DOI: 10.4274/tjh.2014.0288
PMCID: PMC4439901
PMID: 25805669

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors of 
this paper have no conflicts of interest, including specific financial 
interests, relationships, and/or affiliations relevant to the subject matter or 
materials included.


2. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars. 2017 Mar;45(Suppl 2):1-38. doi:
10.5543/tkda.2017.79584.

Iron deficiency and anemia in heart failure.

[Article in English]

Çavuşoğlu Y(1), Altay H, Çetiner M, Güvenç TS, Temizhan A, Ural D, Yeşilbursa D, 
Yıldırım N, Yılmaz MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, 
Eskişehir, Turkey. yukselc@ogu.edu.tr.

Heart failure is an important community health problem. Prevalence and incidence 
of heart failure have continued to rise over the years. Despite recent advances 
in heart failure therapy, prognosis is still poor, rehospitalization rate is 
very high, and quality of life is worse. Co-morbidities in heart failure have 
negative impact on clinical course of the disease, further impair prognosis, and 
add difficulties to treatment of clinical picture. Therefore, successful 
management of co-morbidities is strongly recommended in addition to conventional 
therapy for heart failure. One of the most common co-morbidities in heart 
failure is presence of iron deficiency and anemia. Current evidence suggests 
that iron deficiency and anemia are more prevalent in patients with heart 
failure and reduced ejection fraction, as well as those with heart failure and 
preserved ejection fraction. Moreover, iron deficiency and anemia are referred 
to as independent predictors for poor prognosis in heart failure. There is 
strong relationship between iron deficiency or anemia and severity of clinical 
status of heart failure. Over the last two decades, many clinical investigations 
have been conducted on clinical effectiveness of treatment of iron deficiency or 
anemia with oral iron, intravenous iron, and erythropoietin therapies. Studies 
with oral iron and erythropoietin therapies did not provide any clinical benefit 
and, in fact, these therapies have been shown to be associated with increase in 
adverse clinical outcomes. However, clinical trials in patients with iron 
deficiency in the presence or absence of anemia have demonstrated considerable 
clinical benefits of intravenous iron therapy, and based on these positive 
outcomes, iron deficiency has become target of therapy in management of heart 
failure. The present report assesses current approaches to iron deficiency and 
anemia in heart failure in light of recent evidence.

DOI: 10.5543/tkda.2017.79584
PMID: 28446734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Turk Psikiyatri Derg. 2022 Summer;33(2):90-96. doi: 10.5080/u25503.

Relationship Between Sleep Disorders and Attention Deficit- Hyperactivity 
Disorder Symptoms in University Students.

[Article in English, Turkish]

Eroğlu EÖ, Aykut DS, Karahan S, Demir B.

OBJECTIVE: Sleep disorders increase the symptoms of attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The aim of this study was to investigate whether 
or not sleep related problems give rise to symptoms of attention deficit and 
hyperactivity-impulsivity in university students.
METHODS: The 252 university students between the ages of 18-25 years included in 
the study were assessed on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), the Adult 
Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Scale, the Beck Depression Inventory 
(BDI) and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI).
RESULTS: The participants of the study comprised 38.5% males and 61.5% females 
with a mean age of 22.39 (±1.93) years. The mean score data were 5.78 (± 2.72) 
on the PSQI, 41.77 (± 20.38) on the Adult Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder Scale, 8.53 (± 6.97) on the BDI and 9.05 (± 7.92) on the BAI. The total 
score and the scores on the attention-deficit and the general problems 
subsections of the Adult Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Scale were 
significantly higher in participants with poor sleep quality (P<0.001). The PSQI 
and the Adult Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Scale scores were 
significantly above the cut-off values in the participants with depression and 
anxiety symptoms as compared to those without these symptoms (P<0.001). The PSQI 
total score positively correlated with the Adult Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity 
Disorder Scale total score (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: University students with sleep disorder have more ADHD symptoms and 
poor quality of sleep increase ADHD sypmtoms. Therefore it's important to 
evaluate quality of sleep in young people suffering from attention problems in 
terms of treatment approaches and interventions.

DOI: 10.5080/u25503
PMID: 35730509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Turk J Haematol. 2011 Sep 5;28(3):248. doi: 10.5152/tjh.2011.68.

Iron deficiency anemia and total antioxidant capacity.

[Article in English]

Wiwanitkit V(1).

Author information:
(1)Wiwanitkit House, Bangkhae, 10160 Bangkok, Thailand, Phone: 662-4132436 
E-mail: wviroj@yahoo.com.

DOI: 10.5152/tjh.2011.68
PMID: 27264381


5. Turk J Haematol. 2016 Jun 5;33(2):156-8. doi: 10.4274/tjh.2015.0206.

Serum Zinc Levels in Iron Deficient Women: A Case-Control Study.

Özhan O, Erdem N(1), Aydoğdu İ, Erkurt A, Kuku İ.

Author information:
(1)Celal Bayar University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Manisa, Turkey, Phone : +90 555 729 88 22, E-mail : neslihnerdem@gmail.com.

Since similar symptoms and findings can be seen in the deficiencies of both iron 
and zinc, we aimed to evaluate the serum zinc levels of women with iron 
deficiency anemia (IDA). This study was conducted with women with iron 
deficiency and a healthy control group. When serum zinc levels were compared, 
they were found to be lower in the IDA group, which was statistically 
significant. With the help of these studies, iron and zinc treatment instead of 
only iron replacement may be considered in cases of iron deficiency.

Publisher: Demir ve çinko eksikliği benzer belirti ve bulgularla giden 
hastalıklar olması sebebiyle, demir eksikliği anemisi (DEA) olan kadınlarda 
serum çinko düzeylerinin değerlendirilmesini planladık. Bu çalışma DEA’lı 
kadınlar ile sağlıklı kontrol olarak alınan kadınlar üzerinde yapıldı. Serum 
çinko düzeyleri karşılaştırıldığında, DEA grubunda istatistiksel olarak düşük 
saptandı. Bu çalışmaların yardımıyla sadece demir değil, demir ve çinkonun 
beraber tedavisi demir eksikliği olan olgularda düşünülebilir.

DOI: 10.4274/tjh.2015.0206
PMCID: PMC5100729
PMID: 27211046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this paper have no conflicts of 
interest, including specific financial interests, relationships, and/or 
affiliations relevant to the subject matter or materials included.