İlaç: ranitidin (etken madde: ranitidine)

Warnings (ranitidine):
Warnings Allergy alert: Do not use if you are allergic to ranitidine or other acid reducers Do not use • if you have trouble or pain swallowing food, vomiting with blood, or bloody or black stools. These may be signs of a serious condition. See your doctor. • with other acid reducers • if you have kidney disease, except under the advice and supervision of a doctor Ask a doctor before use if you have • frequent chest pain • frequent wheezing, particularly with heartburn • unexplained weight loss • nausea or vomiting • stomach pain • had heartburn over 3 months. This may be a sign of a more serious condition. • heartburn with lightheadedness, sweating, or dizziness • chest pain or shoulder pain with shortness of breath; sweating; pain spreading to arms, neck or shoulders; or lightheadedness Stop use and ask a doctor if • your heartburn continues or worsens • you need to take this product for more than 14 days If pregnant or breast-feeding, ask a health professional before use. Keep out of reach of children. In case of overdose, get medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away. (1-800-222-1222)

Warnings (ranitidine):
Warnings Allergy alert: Do not use if you are allergic to ranitidine or other acid reducers Do not use • if you have trouble or pain swallowing food, vomiting with blood, or bloody or black stools. These may be signs of a serious condition. See your doctor. • with other acid reducers Ask a doctor before use if you have • had heartburn over 3 months. This may be a sign of a more serious condition. • heartburn with lightheadedness, sweating or dizziness • chest pain or shoulder pain with shortness of breath; sweating; pain spreading to arms, neck or shoulders; or lightheadedness • frequent chest pain • frequent wheezing, particularly with heartburn • unexplained weight loss • nausea or vomiting • stomach pain Stop use and ask a doctor if • your heartburn continues or worsens • you need to take this product for more than 14 days If pregnant or breast-feeding, ask a health professional before use. Keep out of reach of children.