=== PubMed: sertraline drug interactions serotonin syndrome maoi ===
1. Epilepsy Res Suppl. 1996;11:153-80.

Rational polypharmacy in the bipolar affective disorders.

Post RM(1), Ketter TA, Pazzaglia PJ, Denicoff K, George MS, Callahan A, Leverich 
G, Frye M.

Author information:
(1)Biological Psychiatry Branch, NIMH, Bethesda, MD 20892-1272, USA.

Bipolar affective illness represents a syndrome not readily treated by single 
agents. Approximately 50% of patients are inadequately responsive to lithium and 
the majority of patients require supplemental antidepressants, antimanic, 
antipsychotic or hypnotic medications. These traditional adjunctive medications 
are associated with potential problems. Antidepressants may precipitate mania 
(at a rate about double that of placebo) or cause cycle acceleration. 
Neuroleptics may be associated with either more profound or longer depressive 
phases, and clearly increase the risk of tardive dyskinesia, to which bipolar 
patients appear particularly predisposed. Moreover, there are subgroups of 
patients who are known to be poorly responsive to lithium. These include 
patients with rapid cycling, dysphoric mania, co-morbid drug or alcohol abuse, a 
pattern of depression-mania-well interval (D-M-I as opposed to the M-D-I 
pattern), and patients without a family history of bipolar illness in 
first-degree relatives. There is increasing recognition that the anticonvulsants 
carbamazepine and valproate are effective alternatives or adjuncts to lithium in 
the acute and long-term treatment of bipolar illness. Ideally, one would want to 
assess whether patients who were unresponsive to lithium were responsive to an 
anticonvulsant alone prior to utilizing lithium in addition to anticonvulsant 
combination therapy. However, from the clinical perspective, it is often more 
expedient to use an anticonvulsant adjunctively to lithium to assess the 
efficacy of this combination and establish mood stabilization. When lithium is 
not discontinued, the increased morbidity during lithium withdrawal also would 
not occur and would not confound the evaluation of the new agent. We suggest the 
initial use of acute adjuncts to lithium with the anticonvulsants carbamazepine 
or valproate (instead of neuroleptics) so that their efficacy can be assessed in 
the individual's acute episode, with the likelihood of a positive response in 
longer-term prophylaxis. Hypnotic benzodiazepines with anticonvulsant 
properties, such as clonazepam or lorazepam, are often used to help to induce 
sleep in escalating bipolar patients, and may be useful adjuncts as well. 
Patients who were inadequately responsive to either carbamazepine or valproate 
alone may be responsive to the anticonvulsant combination. In a similar fashion, 
one can also utilize several mood-stabilizing drugs (lithium and an 
anticonvulsant such as carbamazepine or valproate) in the treatment of 
depressive breakthroughs, and then augment this combination (if necessary) with 
a catecholamine-active antidepressant such as bupropion or a serotonin-selective 
reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) such as fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline or if 
necessary a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI). Once the patient has responded 
to a combination of drugs, it becomes problematic to decide whether the last 
agent added was the crucial ingredient in helping the patient achieve remission 
or that remission might have occurred with this agent alone. A conservative 
approach would have merit in patients who are finally stabilized on complex 
polypharmacy regimens only after many years of sequential trials; in this 
instance, the potential risk of re-exacerbating the illness with a taper of one 
of the drugs in the regimen. Rational polypharmacy should thus be implemented 
with careful delineation of the prior course of illness (typically using life 
chart methodology) and targeted treatment outcomes titrated against side 
effects, using sequential clinical trials in individual patients who have not 
adequately responded to monotherapy. In this fashion, it is hoped that 
pharmacodynamic differences among agents can be maximized and pharmacokinetic 
and side effects minimized.

PMID: 9294735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mayo Clin Proc. 2006 Mar;81(3):330-4. doi: 10.4065/81.3.330.

Anticipating potential linezolid-SSRI interactions in the general hospital 
setting: an MAOI in disguise.

Sola CL(1), Bostwick JM, Hart DA, Lineberry TW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, Minn 55905, USA.

Linezolid, a novel antimicrobial with activity against gram-positive bacteria 
including pathogens resistant to traditional antimicrobials, also inhibits 
monoamine oxidase. This latter property can cause potentially lethal adverse 
interactions with antidepressant medications. Long known to psychiatrists, 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) and complications of their use may be 
unfamiliar to medical and surgical practitioners who may thus unwittingly 
precipitate a hypertensive crisis or serotonin syndrome. We review the 
pharmacology of MAOis and describe 3 clinical situations In which 
linezolid-selective serotonin inhibitor (SSRI) interactions, actual or 
potential, figured prominently.

DOI: 10.4065/81.3.330
PMID: 16529136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]