=== PubMed: amoxicillin drug interactions allergy penicillin ===
1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004 Jan;130(1 Suppl):1-45. doi: 
10.1016/j.otohns.2003.12.003.

Antimicrobial treatment guidelines for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis.

Anon JB(1), Jacobs MR, Poole MD, Ambrose PG, Benninger MS, Hadley JA, Craig WA; 
Sinus And Allergy Health Partnership.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, USA.

Erratum in
    Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2004 Jun;130(6):794-6.

Treatment guidelines developed by the Sinus and Allergy Health Partnership for 
acute bacterial rhinosinusitis (ABRS) were originally published in 2000. These 
guidelines were designed to: (1) educate clinicians and patients (or patients’ 
families) about the differences between viral and bacterial rhinosinusitis; (2) 
reduce the use of antibiotics for nonbacterial nasal/sinus disease; (3) provide 
recommendations for the diagnosis and optimal treatment of ABRS; (4) promote the 
use of appropriate antibiotic therapy when bacterial infection is likely; and 
(5) describe the current understanding of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics 
and how they relate to the effectiveness of antimicrobial therapy. The original 
guidelines are updated here to include the most recent information on management 
principles, antimicrobial susceptibility patterns, and therapeutic options.
BURDEN OF DISEASE: An estimated 20 million cases of ABRS occur annually in the 
United States. According to National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) 
data, sinusitis is the fifth most common diagnosis for which an antibiotic is 
prescribed. Sinusitis accounted for 9% and 21% of all pediatric and adult 
antibiotic prescriptions, respectively, written in 2002. The primary diagnosis 
of sinusitis results in expenditures of approximately $3.5 billion per year in 
the United States.
DEFINITION AND DIAGNOSIS OF ABRS: ABRS is most often preceded by a viral upper 
respiratory tract infection (URI). Allergy, trauma, dental infection, or other 
factors that lead to inflammation of the nose and paranasal sinuses may also 
predispose individuals to developing ABRS. Patients with a “common cold” (viral 
URI) usually report some combination of the following symptoms: sneezing, 
rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, hyposmia/anosmia, facial pressure, postnasal drip, 
sore throat, cough, ear fullness, fever, and myalgia. A change in the color or 
the characteristic of the nasal discharge is not a specific sign of a bacterial 
infection. Bacterial superinfection may occur at any time during the course of a 
viral URI. The risk that bacterial superinfection has occurred is greater if the 
illness is still present after 10 days. Because there may be cases that fall out 
of the “norm” of this typical progression, practicing clinicians need to rely on 
their clinical judgment when using these guidelines. In general, however, a 
diagnosis of ABRS may be made in adults or children with symptoms of a viral URI 
that have not improved after 10 days or worsen after 5 to 7 days. There may be 
some or all of the following signs and symptoms: nasal drainage, nasal 
congestion, facial pressure/pain (especially when unilateral and focused in the 
region of a particular sinus), postnasal drainage, hyposmia/anosmia, fever, 
cough, fatigue, maxillary dental pain, and ear pressure/fullness. Physical 
examination provides limited information in the diagnosis of ABRS. While 
sometimes helpful, plain film radiographs, computed tomography (CT), and 
magnetic resonance imaging scans are not necessary for cases of ABRS.
MICROBIOLOGY OF ABRS: The most common bacterial species isolated from the 
maxillary sinuses of patients with ABRS are Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis, the latter being more common 
in children. Other streptococcal species, anaerobic bacteria and Staphylococcus 
aureus cause a small percentage of cases.
BACTERIAL RESISTANCE IN ABRS: The increasing prevalence of penicillin 
nonsusceptibility and resistance to other drug classes among S pneumoniae has 
been a problem in the United States, with 15% being penicillin-intermediate and 
25% being penicillin-resistant in recent studies. Resistance to macrolides and 
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) is also common in S pneumoniae. The 
prevalence of β-lactamase-producing isolates of H influenzae is approximately 
30%, while essentially all M catarrhalis isolates produce β-lactamases. 
Resistance of H influenzae to TMP/SMX is also common.
ANTIMICROBIAL TREATMENT GUIDELINES FOR ABRS: These guidelines apply to both 
adults and children. When selecting antibiotic therapy for ABRS, the clinician 
should consider the severity of the disease, the rate of progression of the 
disease, and recent antibiotic exposure. The guidelines now divide patients with 
ABRS into two general categories: (1) those with mild symptoms who have not 
received antibiotics within the past 4 to 6 weeks, and (2) those with mild 
disease who have received antibiotics within the past 4 to 6 weeks or those with 
moderate disease regardless of recent antibiotic exposure. The difference in 
severity of disease does not imply infection with a resistant pathogen. Rather, 
this terminology indicates the relative degree of acceptance of possible 
treatment failure and the likelihood of spontaneous resolution of 
symptoms—patients with more severe symptoms are less likely to resolve their 
disease spontaneously. The primary goal of antibiotic therapy is to eradicate 
bacteria from the site of infection, which, in turn, helps (1) return the 
sinuses back to health; (2) decrease the duration of symptoms to allow patients 
to resume daily activities more quickly; (3) prevent severe complications such 
as meningitis and brain abscess; and (4) decrease the development of chronic 
disease. Severe or life-threatening infections with or without complications are 
rare, and are not addressed in these guidelines. Prior antibiotic use is a major 
risk factor associated with the development of infection with 
antimicrobial-resistant strains. Because recent antimicrobial exposure increases 
the risk of carriage of and infection due to resistant organisms, antimicrobial 
therapy should be based upon the patient’s history of recent antibiotic use. The 
panel’s guidelines, therefore, stratify patients according to antibiotic 
exposure in the previous 4 to 6 weeks. Lack of response to therapy at ≥72 hours 
is an arbitrary time established to define treatment failures. Clinicians should 
monitor the response to antibiotic therapy, which may include instructing the 
patient to call the office or clinic if symptoms persist or worsen over the next 
few days. The predicted bacteriologic and clinical efficacy of antibiotics in 
adults and children has been determined according to mathematical modeling of 
ABRS developed by Michael Poole, MD, PhD, based on pathogen distribution, 
resolution rates without treatment, and in vitro microbiologic activity. 
Antibiotics can be placed into the following relative rank order of predicted 
clinical efficacy for adults: 90% to 92% = respiratory fluoroquinolones 
(gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin), ceftriaxone, high-dose 
amoxicillin/clavulanate (4 g/250 mg/day), and amoxicillin/clavulanate (1.75 
g/250 mg/day); 83% to 88% = high-dose amoxicillin (4 g/day), amoxicillin (1.5 
g/day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefixime (based on H influenzae and M catarrhalis 
coverage), cefuroxime axetil, cefdinir, and TMP/SMX; 77% to 81% = doxycycline, 
clindamycin (based on gram-positive coverage only), azithromycin, clarithromycin 
and erythromycin, and telithromycin; 65% to 66% = cefaclor and loracarbef. The 
predicted spontaneous resolution rate in patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
ABRS is 62%. Antibiotics can be placed into the following relative rank order of 
predicted clinical efficacy in children with ABRS: 91% to 92% = ceftriaxone, 
high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day) and 
amoxicillin/clavulanate (45 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day); 82% to 87% = high-dose 
amoxicillin (90 mg/kg per day), amoxicillin (45 mg/kg per day), cefpodoxime 
proxetil, cefixime (based on H influenzae and M catarrhalis coverage only), 
cefuroxime axetil, cefdinir, and TMP/SMX; and 78% to 80% = clindamycin (based on 
gram-positive coverage only), cefprozil, azithromycin, clarithromycin, and 
erythromycin; 67% to 68% = cefaclor and loracarbef. The predicted spontaneous 
resolution rate in untreated children with a presumed diagnosis of ABRS is 63%. 
Recommendations for initial therapy for adult patients with mild disease (who 
have not received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks) include the 
following choices: amoxicillin/clavulanate (1.75 to 4 g/250 mg per day), 
amoxicillin (1.5 to 4 g/day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or 
cefdinir. While TMP/SMX, doxycycline, azithromycin, clarithromycin, 
erythromycin, or telithromycin may be considered for patients with β-lactam 
allergies, bacteriologic failure rates of 20% to 25% are possible. Failure to 
respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours should prompt either a switch to 
alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 
4).When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider 
the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. Recommendations for initial 
therapy for adults with mild disease who have received antibiotics in the 
previous 4 to 6 weeks or adults with moderate disease include the following 
choices: respiratory fluoroquinolone (eg, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, 
moxifloxacin) or high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (4 g/250 mg per day). The 
widespread use of respiratory fluoroquinolones for patients with milder disease 
may promote resistance of a wide spectrum of organisms to this class of agents. 
Ceftriaxone (parenteral, 1 to 2 g/day for 5 days) or combination therapy with 
adequate gram-positive and negative coverage may also be considered. Examples of 
appropriate regimens of combination therapy include high-dose amoxicillin or 
clindamycin plus cefixime, or high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus 
rifampin. While the clinical effectiveness of ceftriaxone and these combinations 
for ABRS is unproven; the panel considers these reasonable therapeutic options 
based on the spectrum of activity of these agents and on data extrapolated from 
acute otitis media studies. Rifampin should not be used as monotherapy, 
casually, or for longer than 10 to 14 days, as resistance quickly develops to 
this agent. Rifampin is also a well-known inducer of several cytochrome p450 
isoenzymes and therefore has a high potential for drug interactions. Failure of 
a patient to respond to antimicrobial therapy after 72 hours of therapy should 
prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the 
patient (see Table 4). When a change in antibiotic therapy is made, the 
clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the initial agent. 
Patients who have received effective antibiotic therapy and continue to be 
symptomatic may need further evaluation. A CT scan, fiberoptic endoscopy or 
sinus aspiration and culture may be necessary. Recommendations for initial 
therapy for children with mild disease and who have not received antibiotics in 
the previous 4 to 6 weeks include the following: high-dose 
amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per day), amoxicillin (90 mg/kg per 
day), cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or cefdinir. TMP/SMX, 
azithromycin, clarithromycin, or erythromycin is recommended if the patient has 
a history of immediate Type I hypersensitivity reaction to β-lactams. These 
antibiotics have limited effectiveness against the major pathogens of ABRS and 
bacterial failure of 20% to 25% is possible. The clinician should differentiate 
an immediate hypersensitivity reaction from other less dangerous side effects. 
Children with immediate hypersensitivity reactions to β-lactams may need: 
desensitization, sinus cultures, or other ancillary procedures and studies. 
Children with other types of reactions and side effects may tolerate one 
specific β-lactam, but not another. Failure to respond to antimicrobial therapy 
after 72 hours should prompt either a switch to alternate antimicrobial therapy 
or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 5).When a change in antibiotic therapy 
is made, the clinician should consider the limitations in coverage of the 
initial agent. The recommended initial therapy for children with mild disease 
who have received antibiotics in the previous 4 to 6 weeks or children with 
moderate disease is high-dose amoxicillin/clavulanate (90 mg/6.4 mg per kg per 
day). Cefpodoxime proxetil, cefuroxime axetil, or cefdinir may be used if there 
is a penicillin allergy (eg, penicillin rash); in such instances, cefdinir is 
preferred because of high patient acceptance. TMP/SMX, azithromycin, 
clarithromycin, or erythromycin is recommended if the patient is β-lactam 
allergic, but these do not provide optimal coverage. Clindamycin is appropriate 
if S pneumoniae is identified as a pathogen. Ceftriaxone (parenteral, 50 mg/kg 
per day for 5 days) or combination therapy with adequate gram-positive and 
-negative coverage may also be considered. Examples of appropriate regimens of 
combination therapy include high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus cefixime, 
or high-dose amoxicillin or clindamycin plus rifampin. The clinical 
effectiveness of ceftriaxone and these combinations for ABRS is unproven; the 
panel considers these reasonable therapeutic options based on spectrum of 
activity and on data extrapolated from acute otitis media studies. Rifampin 
should not be used as monotherapy, casually, or for longer than 10 to 14 days as 
resistance quickly develops to this agent. Failure to respond to antimicrobial 
therapy after 72 hours of therapy should prompt either a switch to alternate 
antimicrobial therapy or reevaluation of the patient (see Table 5). When a 
change in antibiotic therapy is made, the clinician should consider the 
limitations in coverage of the initial agent. Patients who have received 
effective antibiotic therapy and continue to be symptomatic may need further 
evaluation. A CT scan, fiberoptic endoscopy or sinus aspiration and culture may 
be necessary.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otohns.2003.12.003
PMCID: PMC7118847
PMID: 14726904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mayo Clin Proc. 1983 Jan;58(1):21-32.

The penicillins.

Wright AJ, Wilkowske CJ.

The penicillins as a group are the most frequently and widely used of the 
antimicrobial agents because they are effective, low in toxicity, and relatively 
inexpensive. Effectiveness is due to the bactericidal action, the excellent 
distribution throughout the body spaces, and the wide spectrum of activity. 
Knowledge of the variation in spectrum of activity of the various types of 
penicillins is needed for effective use of the appropriate drug against 
individual infections. Allergenicity is the most frequent and serious problem 
associated with the use of penicillins. Individual penicillins, however, do have 
different side effects. The older penicillins are so inexpensive that the cost 
of their use need hardly be considered, whereas the newer penicillins are 
expensive and should be used only when they are clearly more effective for 
treatment than are drugs such as penicillin G.

PMID: 6218348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2014 Mar;14(3):418. doi: 10.1007/s11882-013-0418-0.

Genotyping for severe drug hypersensitivity.

Karlin E(1), Phillips E.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 1161-21 St Avenue South, A-2200 
Medical Center North, Nashville, TN, 37232-2582, USA.

Over the past decade, there have been significant advances in our understanding 
of the immunopathogenesis and pharmacogenomics of severe 
immunologically-mediated adverse drug reactions. Such T-cell-mediated adverse 
drug reactions such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(SJS/TEN), drug-induced liver disease (DILI) and other drug hypersensitivity 
syndromes have more recently been shown to be mediated through interactions with 
various class I and II HLA alleles. Key examples have included the associations 
of HLA-B*15:02 and carbamazepine induced SJS/TEN in Southeast Asian populations 
and HLA-B*57:01 and abacavir hypersensitivity. HLA-B*57:01 screening to prevent 
abacavir hypersensitivity exemplifies a successful translational roadmap from 
pharmacogenomic discovery through to widespread clinical implementation. 
Ultimately, our increased understanding of the interaction between drugs and the 
MHC could be used to inform drug design and drive pre-clinical toxicity programs 
to improve drug safety.

DOI: 10.1007/s11882-013-0418-0
PMCID: PMC4014135
PMID: 24429903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Eric Karlin declares that 
he has no conflict of interest.


4. mBio. 2025 Aug 13;16(8):e0137225. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01372-25. Epub 2025 Jul
10.

Exploring β-lactam interactions with DacB1: unraveling optimal therapies for 
combating drug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Nantongo M(1)(2), Nguyen DC(3), Shin E(2)(4), Bethel CR(2), Taracila MA(2)(4), 
Dousa KM(4)(5), Li Q(4), Fletcher S(4), Kurz SG(6), Kreiswirth BN(7), Boom 
WH(1)(4)(8), Holland S(9), Rubin EJ(10), Bonomo RA(1)(4)(5)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve 
University (CWRU), Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Research Service, Louis Stokes Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, 
Ohio, USA.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Division of 
Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, CWRU, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Medical Service, Veterans Affairs Northeast Ohio Healthcare System (VANEOHS), 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
(7)Center for Discovery and Innovation, Hackensack, New Jersey, USA.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, University Hospitals 
Cleveland Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(9)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institutes of 
Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.
(10)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(11)Departments of Biochemistry, Pharmacology, and Proteomics and 
Bioinformatics, CWRU; Cleveland Geriatrics Research Education and Clinical 
Center (GRECC), VANEOHS; CWRU Cleveland VAMC Center for Antibiotic Resistance 
and Epidemiology (Case VA CARES), Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Tuberculosis (TB) continues to pose a global public health threat, exacerbated 
by rising drug-resistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). DacB1, a 
D,D-carboxypeptidase critical in Mtb peptidoglycan biosynthesis, is a promising 
target for β-lactam antibiotics (BLs), which remain underutilized in TB 
treatment. Dual BL therapy may enhance efficacy by inactivating multiple targets 
within the peptidoglyan synthesis pathway. Minimum inhibitory concentrations 
(MICs) for β-lactams and β-lactamase inhibitors against Mtb H37Ra, H37Rv, and 
clinical isolates showed that imipenem, meropenem, or tebipenem MICs were 
reduced when combined with amoxicillin or ceftriaxone or β-lactamase inhibitors 
such as clavulanate or durlobactam. Timed electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS) captured acyl-enzyme adducts between DacB1 and BLs, 
revealing binding interactions with carbapenems (imipenem, meropenem, and 
tebipenem) but not most penicillins or cephalosporins except cloxacillin and 
cefoxitin. Differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) combined with circular 
dichroism (CD) confirmed physical and structural changes in DacB1 upon BL 
binding despite no alteration in melting temperature. Carbapenem-DacB1 
interactions were notably faster with imipenem, likely due to reduced steric 
hindrance compared to meropenem and tebipenem. Molecular modeling revealed 
conserved penicillin-binding protein motifs within the active site of DacB1: 
S121XXK124, S176XN178, and K282TG284 (PDB ID # 4PPR). Building on this, 
molecular docking suggested favorable interactions between these motifs and the 
carbapenems: the carbapenem carbonyl group aids in positioning within DacB1's 
oxyanion hole, ready for acylation, while hydrophobic interactions with the 
cyclic R2 side chains and C1 methyl groups in meropenem and tebipenem contribute 
to steric hindrance hence slow acyl-enzyme formation. These findings enhance our 
understanding of DacB1 inhibition and suggest that carbapenems, particularly in 
combination therapies, hold promise as effective TB treatments.
IMPORTANCE: TB remains a significant public health threat, particularly due to 
the rising prevalence of drug-resistant Mtb strains. Current treatment options 
for drug-resistant TB are costly, toxic, and often ineffective, necessitating 
the exploration of alternative therapeutic strategies. This study is of critical 
importance as it investigates the potential of β-lactam antibiotics (BLs), a 
class historically considered ineffective against Mtb, for repurposing in TB 
treatment. By targeting DacB1, a key enzyme in Mtb peptidoglycan biosynthesis, 
this research provides new insights into the mechanism of β-lactam interactions 
and their potential to disrupt cell wall synthesis. The findings demonstrate 
that dual β-lactam therapy and β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations 
enhance antibiotic efficacy, suggesting a promising avenue for combating 
drug-resistant TB. Furthermore, structural and molecular analyses confirm that 
carbapenems, particularly imipenem, meropenem, and tebipenem, effectively bind 
to DacB1, paving the way for optimized treatment strategies. Given the 
challenges in developing new TB drugs, repurposing β-lactams offers a 
cost-effective and readily implementable solution to address antimicrobial 
resistance. This study contributes valuable knowledge that could accelerate the 
development of novel TB therapies, improve treatment success rates, and 
ultimately reduce TB-related mortality worldwide.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01372-25
PMCID: PMC12345272
PMID: 40637416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.