İlaç: budesonid (etken madde: budesonide)

Warnings (budesonide):
Warnings Do not use in children under 6 years of age if you have ever had an allergic reaction to any of the ingredients Ask a doctor before use if you have had recent nose ulcers or nose surgery have had a nose injury that has not healed are using a steroid medicine for asthma, allergies or skin rash have an eye infection have or had glaucoma or cataracts When using this product the growth rate of some children may be slower some symptoms may get better on the first day of treatment. It may take up to two weeks of daily use to feel the most symptom relief. do not share this bottle with anyone else as this may spread germs remember to tell your doctor about all the medicines you take, including this one Stop use and ask a doctor if you have, or come into contact with someone who has, chickenpox, measles or tuberculosis you have or develop symptoms of an infection such as persistent fever you have any change in vision you have severe or frequent nosebleeds If pregnant or breast-feeding , ask a health professional before use. Keep out of reach of children. In case of overdose, get medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away (1-800-222-1222).

Warnings (budesonide):
Warnings Do not use in children under 6 years of age if you have ever had an allergic reaction to any of the ingredients Ask a doctor before use if you have had recent nose ulcers or nose surgery have had a nose injury that has not healed are using a steroid medicine for asthma, allergies or skin rash have an eye infection have or had glaucoma or cataracts When using this product the growth rate of some children may be slower some symptoms may get better on the first day of treatment. It may take up to two weeks of daily use to feel the most symptom relief. do not share this bottle with anyone else as this may spread germs remember to tell your doctor about all medicines you take, including this one Stop use and ask a doctor if you have, or come into contact with someone who has chickenpox, measles or tuberculosis you have or develop symptoms of an infection such as persistent fever you have any change in vision you have severe or frequent nosebleeds If pregnant or breast-feeding, ask a health professional before use. Keep out of reach of children. In case of overdose, get medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away. (1-800-222-1222)