=== PubMed: levetiracetam drug interactions anticonvulsant ===
1. JAMA. 2022 Apr 5;327(13):1269-1281. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.3880.

Antiseizure Medications for Adults With Epilepsy: A Review.

Kanner AM(1), Bicchi MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Epilepsy Center and Epilepsy Division, Department of Neurology, 
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2022 Aug 16;328(7):680. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.10597.
    JAMA. 2022 Aug 16;328(7):680. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.10594.

IMPORTANCE: Epilepsy affects approximately 65 million people worldwide. 
Persistent seizures are associated with a 20% to 40% risk of bodily injuries 
(eg, fractures, burns, concussions) over 12-month follow-up. The primary goal of 
epilepsy treatment is to eliminate seizures while minimizing adverse effects of 
antiseizure drugs (ASDs).
OBSERVATIONS: An epileptic seizure is defined as a sudden occurrence of 
transient signs and symptoms caused by abnormal and excessive or synchronous 
neuronal activity in the brain. Focal and generalized epilepsy are the 2 most 
frequent types of epilepsy; diagnosis is based on the type of seizures. There 
are 26 US Food and Drug Administration-approved medications for epilepsy, of 
which 24 have similar antiseizure efficacy for focal epilepsy and 9 have similar 
efficacy for generalized epilepsy. The decision to initiate an ASD should be 
individualized, but should be strongly considered after 2 unprovoked seizures or 
after 1 unprovoked seizure that occurred during sleep and/or in the presence of 
epileptiform activity on an electroencephalogram and/or in the presence of a 
structural lesion on the brain magnetic resonance imaging. The ASDs must be 
selected based on the seizure and epilepsy types, the epilepsy syndrome, and the 
adverse effects associated with the drug. For focal epilepsy, oxcarbazepine and 
lamotrigine are first-line therapy, while levetiracetam can be also considered 
if there is no history of psychiatric disorder. For generalized epilepsy, the 
selection of the ASD is based on the type of epilepsy syndrome and the patient's 
sex, age, and psychiatric history. Seizure freedom is achieved in approximately 
60% to 70% of all patients. A total of 25% to 50% of patients also experience 
neurologic, psychiatric, cognitive, or medical disorders, such as mood, anxiety, 
and attention deficit disorders and migraines. For these patients, selecting an 
ASD should consider the presence of these disorders and concomitant use of 
medications to treat them. ASDs with cytochrome P450 enzyme-inducing properties 
(eg, carbamazepine, phenytoin) may worsen comorbid coronary and cerebrovascular 
disease by causing hyperlipidemia and accelerating the metabolism of concomitant 
drugs used for their treatment. They can also facilitate the development of 
osteopenia and osteoporosis.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Epilepsy affects approximately 65 million people 
worldwide and is associated with increased rates of bodily injuries and 
mortality when not optimally treated. For focal and generalized epilepsy, 
selection of ASDs should consider the seizure and epilepsy types and epilepsy 
syndrome, as well as the patient's age and sex, comorbidities, and potential 
drug interactions.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.3880
PMID: 35380580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neuropsychopharmacol Rep. 2021 Sep;41(3):336-351. doi: 10.1002/npr2.12196.
Epub  2021 Jul 23.

Neuropharmacology of Antiseizure Drugs.

Hakami T(1).

Author information:
(1)The Faculty of Medicine, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Antiseizure drugs (ASDs) are the primary therapy for epilepsy, with 
more than 20 drugs introduced into clinical practice to date. These drugs are 
typically grouped by their mechanisms of action and therapeutic spectrum. This 
article aims to educate non-neurologists and medical students about the new 
frontiers in the pharmacology of ASDs and presents the current state of the 
literature on the efficacy and tolerability of these agents.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and evidence-based 
meta-analyses of ASD efficacy and tolerability as initial monotherapy for 
epileptic seizures and syndromes were identified in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, and Elsevier Clinical Pharmacology.
RESULTS: The choice of ASD varies primarily according to the seizure type. 
Practical guidelines for ASD selection in patients with new-onset and 
drug-resistant epilepsy were recently published. The guidelines have shown that 
the newer-generation drugs, which have unique mechanistic and pharmacokinetic 
properties, are better tolerated but have similar efficacy compared with the 
older drugs. Several ASDs are effective as first-line monotherapy in focal 
seizures, including lamotrigine, carbamazepine, phenytoin, levetiracetam, and 
zonisamide. Valproate remains the first-line drug for many patients with 
generalized and unclassified epilepsies. However, valproate should be avoided, 
if possible, in women of childbearing potential because of teratogenicity. 
Toxicity profile precludes several drugs from use as first-line treatment, for 
example, vigabatrin, felbamate, and rufinamide.
CONCLUSIONS: Antiseizure drugs have different pharmacologic profiles that should 
be considered when selecting and prescribing these agents for epilepsy. These 
include pharmacokinetic properties, propensity for drug-drug interactions, and 
adverse effects.

© 2021 The Authors. Neuropsychopharmacology Reports published by John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Japanese Society of 
Neuropsychopharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/npr2.12196
PMCID: PMC8411307
PMID: 34296824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


3. Ther Drug Monit. 2018 Oct;40(5):526-548. doi: 10.1097/FTD.0000000000000546.

Therapeutic Drug Monitoring of Antiepileptic Drugs in Epilepsy: A 2018 Update.

Patsalos PN(1)(2), Spencer EP(1), Berry DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Society, Therapeutic Drug Monitoring Unit, Chalfont Centre for 
Epilepsy, Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Epilepsy, UCL-Institute of Neurology, 
Queen Square, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) are the mainstay of epilepsy treatment. 
Since 1989, 18 new AEDs have been licensed for clinical use and there are now 27 
licensed AEDs in total for the treatment of patients with epilepsy. Furthermore, 
several AEDs are also used for the management of other medical conditions, for 
example, pain and bipolar disorder. This has led to an increasingly widespread 
application of therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of AEDs, making AEDs among the 
most common medications for which TDM is performed. The aim of this review is to 
provide an overview of the indications for AED TDM, to provide key information 
for each individual AED in terms of the drug's prescribing indications, key 
pharmacokinetic characteristics, associated drug-drug pharmacokinetic 
interactions, and the value and the intricacies of TDM for each AED. The concept 
of the reference range is discussed as well as practical issues such as choice 
of sample types (total versus free concentrations in blood versus saliva) and 
sample collection and processing.
METHODS: The present review is based on published articles and searches in 
PubMed and Google Scholar, last searched in March 2018, in addition to 
references from relevant articles.
RESULTS: In total, 171 relevant references were identified and used to prepare 
this review.
CONCLUSIONS: TDM provides a pragmatic approach to epilepsy care, in that bespoke 
dose adjustments are undertaken based on drug concentrations so as to optimize 
clinical outcome. For the older first-generation AEDs (carbamazepine, 
ethosuximide, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone, and valproic acid), much data 
have accumulated in this regard. However, this is occurring increasingly for the 
new AEDs (brivaracetam, eslicarbazepine acetate, felbamate, gabapentin, 
lacosamide, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, perampanel, piracetam, 
pregabalin, rufinamide, stiripentol, sulthiame, tiagabine, topiramate, 
vigabatrin, and zonisamide).

DOI: 10.1097/FTD.0000000000000546
PMID: 29957667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Expert Rev Neurother. 2024 Aug;24(8):773-786. doi: 
10.1080/14737175.2024.2365946. Epub 2024 Jun 13.

An update on pharmacotherapy for trigeminal neuralgia.

Pergolizzi JV Jr(1), LeQuang JA(1), El-Tallawy SN(2)(3), Wagner M(1), Ahmed 
RS(4), Varrassi G(5).

Author information:
(1)NEMA Research, Pain management, Naples, FL, USA.
(2)Anesthesia and Pain Department, King Khalid University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Anesthesia Department, Medicine, Minia University & NCI, Minia, Egypt.
(4)College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Paolo Procacci Foundation, Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Trigeminal neuralgia is a rare condition that can be effectively 
treated by carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine but these older drugs are associated 
with dose-dependent and potentially treatment-limiting adverse effects. 
Third-generation anticonvulsants, new calcitonin gene-related peptide blockers 
for migraine, and older drugs such as ketamine and cannabinoids may be promising 
adjuvants or monotherapeutic options.
AREAS COVERED: The new drugs, their presumed mechanisms of action, safety and 
efficacy are discussed herein. There is a paucity of robust clinical evidence in 
support of these drugs for trigeminal neuralgia. New migraine agents are 
considered as well although migraines and trigeminal neuralgia are distinct, 
albeit similar, conditions. No new drugs have been released to market in recent 
years with the specific indication of trigeminal neuralgia.
EXPERT OPINION: In real-world clinical practice, about half of trigeminal 
neuralgia patients take more than one agent for prevention and combination 
therapy may be the optimal approach. Combination therapy might allow for lower 
doses of carbamazepine or oxcarbazepine, thus reducing the number and severity 
of potential adverse events but the potential for pharmacokinetic drug-drug 
interactions must be considered. Drug therapy for trigeminal neuralgia involves 
acute or abortive treatments, often administered in hospital versus long-term 
preventive therapy, usually involving oral agents.

Plain Language Summary: Trigeminal neuralgia is a relatively rare condition that 
usually affects one side of the face below the eye around the cheekbone. The 
cause of trigeminal neuralgia is sometimes a damaged nerve or a nerve that has 
lost part of its outer protective sheath (myelin). However, trigeminal neuralgia 
may have other neurological causes as well. Pain can be triggered by touch, 
pressure, or chewing and it tends to occur in very painful brief attacks 
followed by pauses with little or no pain. There are two types of drug treatment 
for trigeminal neuralgia: drugs to stop an ongoing attack (which are often 
administered in an emergency room or hospital intravenously) and drugs that are 
taken orally over the long term to reduce or prevent attacks.The two most 
effective drugs for trigeminal neuralgia are carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine, 
which are actually drugs to prevent seizures. They are effective in reducing the 
pain intensity and number of attacks of trigeminal neuralgia but they have side 
effects. In fact, these side effects can be so severe that people stop taking 
the drugs.Many new drugs have come to market recently that may work for 
trigeminal neuralgia, although none was specifically developed for this use. The 
newest generation of anti-seizure medications including eslicarbazepine, 
lacosamide, levetiracetam, and retigabine, may be just as effective as the older 
carbamazepine and oxcarbazepine drugs with fewer side effects. Clinical studies 
are needed to test them in trigeminal neuralgia patients but their mechanisms of 
action suggest that they might work well.There are some new drugs developed for 
migraine headache that inhibit a substance in the body called CGRP. Migraine 
headaches and trigeminal neuralgia have some of the same symptoms but they are 
different conditions but both involve too much CGRP.Other new drugs include 
lasmiditan, pimozide (used for Tourette syndrome), tizanidine (muscle relaxant), 
lamotrigine and vixotrigine (anti-seizure drugs) may also be beneficial. It may 
be that people with trigeminal neuralgia will have to take combination therapy, 
the use of two or more drugs with different mechanisms of action. Older drugs 
like ketamine and cannabinoids are also being considered as possible add-on 
agents for therapy for trigeminal neuralgia.

DOI: 10.1080/14737175.2024.2365946
PMID: 38870050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]