=== PubMed: colchicine drug interactions statins macrolides toxicity ===
1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2011 Jan;17(1):28-30. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0b013e3182056042.

Colchicine-induced rhabdomyolysis in a heart/lung transplant patient with 
concurrent use of cyclosporin, pravastatin, and azithromycin.

Bouquié R(1), Deslandes G, Renaud C, Dailly E, Haloun A, Jolliet P.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Department and EA 4275 Biostatistique, Recherche 
Clinique et Mesures Subjectives en Santé, Hospital of the University of Nantes, 
Nantes, France. regis.bouquie@chu-nantes.fr

We report a case of colchicine-induced rhabdomyolysis in a 
heart/lung-transplanted man treated with cyclosporin. A treatment was to resolve 
an acute gouty arthritis and was started with 3 mg of colchicine the first day, 
then 2 mg the second and the third day, and finally 1 mg/d during 6 days. Eight 
days later, the patient developed multiple organ failure and rhabdomyolysis. The 
concentration of colchicine analyzed was greater than the standard 153 hours 
after his last intake. Pharmacokinetic interactions are responsible of this 
toxicity. Cyclosporin, pravastatin, and azithromycin are known to inhibit 
P-glycoprotein, which will enhance the intracellular colchicine level by acting 
in its bioavailability and moderating hepatic and renal excretion. Moreover, 
long-term treatment by cyclosporin generates chronic renal failure that will, in 
the same time, decrease colchicine elimination. Even short-term administration 
of therapeutic colchicine dose may cause colchicine-related toxicity, especially 
in the setting of a renal failure and/or polymedicinal treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0b013e3182056042
PMID: 21169852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neth J Med. 2008 May;66(5):204-6.

Colchicine-induced neuromyopathy in a patient with chronic renal failure: the 
role of clarithromycin.

van der Velden W(1), Huussen J, Ter Laak H, de Sévaux R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haematology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Neuromyopathy is a rare side effect of chronic colchicine therapy, most often 
occurring in patients with chronic renal failure. Drugs interacting with 
colchicine metabolism through CYP(3)A(4) and P-glycoprotein can accelerate 
accumulation and toxicity. We describe a case of an interaction between 
clarithromycin and colchicine resulting in acute neuromyopathy, and we conclude 
that combined use of macrolides and colchicine should be avoided.

PMID: 18490798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2010 Jun;48(5):407-14. doi:
10.3109/15563650.2010.495348.

Colchicine poisoning: the dark side of an ancient drug.

Finkelstein Y(1), Aks SE, Hutson JR, Juurlink DN, Nguyen P, Dubnov-Raz G, Pollak 
U, Koren G, Bentur Y.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
yaron.finkelstein@sickkids.ca

INTRODUCTION: Colchicine is used mainly for the treatment and prevention of gout 
and for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). It has a narrow therapeutic index, 
with no clear-cut distinction between nontoxic, toxic, and lethal doses, causing 
substantial confusion among clinicians. Although colchicine poisoning is 
sometimes intentional, unintentional toxicity is common and often associated 
with a poor outcome.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review by searching OVID MEDLINE between 1966 
and January 2010. The search strategy included "colchicine" and "poisoning" or 
"overdose" or "toxicity" or "intoxication."
TOXICOKINETICS: Colchicine is readily absorbed after oral administration, but 
undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism. It is widely distributed and binds to 
intracellular elements. Colchicine is primarily metabolized by the liver, 
undergoes significant enterohepatic re-circulation, and is also excreted by the 
kidneys. THERAPEUTIC AND TOXIC DOSES: The usual adult oral doses for FMF is 
1.2-2.4 mg/day; in acute gout 1.2 mg/day and for gout prophylaxis 0.5-0.6 mg/day 
three to four times a week. High fatality rate was reported after acute 
ingestions exceeding 0.5 mg/kg. The lowest reported lethal doses of oral 
colchicine are 7-26 mg.
DRUG INTERACTIONS: CYP 3A4 and P-glycoprotein inhibitors, such as 
clarithromycin, erythromycin, ketoconazole, ciclosporin, and natural grapefruit 
juice can increase colchicine concentrations. Co-administration with statins may 
increase the risk of myopathy.
MECHANISMS OF TOXICITY: Colchicine's toxicity is an extension of its mechanism 
of action - binding to tubulin and disrupting the microtubular network. As a 
result, affected cells experience impaired protein assembly, decreased 
endocytosis and exocytosis, altered cell morphology, decreased cellular 
motility, arrest of mitosis, and interrupted cardiac myocyte conduction and 
contractility. The culmination of these mechanisms leads to multi-organ 
dysfunction and failure. REPRODUCTIVE TOXICOLOGY AND LACTATION: Colchicine was 
not shown to adversely affect reproductive potential in males or females. It 
crosses the placenta but there is no evidence of fetal toxicity. Colchicine is 
excreted into breast milk and considered compatible with lactation.
CLINICAL FEATURES: Colchicine poisoning presents in three sequential and usually 
overlapping phases: 1) 10-24 h after ingestion - gastrointestinal phase 
mimicking gastroenteritis may be absent after intravenous administration; 2) 24 
h to 7 days after ingestion - multi-organ dysfunction. Death results from 
rapidly progressive multi-organ failure and sepsis. Delayed presentation, 
pre-existing renal or liver impairment are associated with poor prognosis. 3) 
Recovery typically occurs within a few weeks of ingestion, and is generally a 
complete recovery barring complications of the acute illness.
DIAGNOSIS: History of ingestion of tablets, parenteral administration, or 
consumption of colchicine-containing plants suggest the diagnosis. Colchicine 
poisoning should be suspected in patients with access to the drug and the 
typical toxidrome (gastroenteritis, hypotension, lactic acidosis, and prerenal 
azotemia).
MANAGEMENT: Timely gastrointestinal decontamination should be considered with 
activated charcoal, and very large, recent (<60 min) ingestions may warrant 
gastric lavage. Supportive treatments including administration of granulocyte 
colony-stimulating factor are the mainstay of treatment. Although a specific 
experimental treatment (Fab fragment antibodies) for colchicine poisoning has 
been used, it is not commercially available.
CONCLUSION: Although colchicine poisoning is relatively uncommon, it is 
imperative to recognize its features as it is associated with a high mortality 
rate when missed.

DOI: 10.3109/15563650.2010.495348
PMID: 20586571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Drug Saf. 2013 Sep;36(9):779-87. doi: 10.1007/s40264-013-0055-5.

Characterization of Statin-Associated Myopathy Case Reports in Thailand Using 
the Health Product Vigilance Center Database.

Boonmuang P(1), Nathisuwan S(2), Chaiyakunapruk N(3)(4)(5), Suwankesawong W(6), 
Pokhagul P(6), Teerawattanapong N(7), Supsongserm P(8).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Prince of Songkla University, Songkla, Thailand.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol University, 447 Sri-ayutthaya Road, Rajthewi, 
Bangkok, 10400, Thailand. surakit.nat@mahidol.ac.th.
(3)Discipline of Pharmacy, Monash University Sunway Campus, Selangor, Malaysia; 
School of Population Health, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; 
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA; Center of 
Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Naresuan 
University, Phitsanulok, Thailand.
(4)School of Population Health, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD, 
Australia.
(5)School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(6)Health Product Vigilance Center, Food and Drug Administration, Ministry of 
Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand.
(7)Center of Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research, Faculty of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Naresuan University, Phitsanulok, Thailand.
(8)Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol University, 447 Sri-ayutthaya Road, Rajthewi, 
Bangkok, 10400, Thailand.

Erratum in
    Drug Saf. 2013 Jul;36(7):583-4.

BACKGROUND: HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors [statins], a widely prescribed 
cholesterol-lowering therapy, are associated with muscle-related adverse events. 
While characteristics of such events are well documented in Western countries, 
little data exists for the Thai population.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine the characteristics of 
patients, type and dosing of statin, and to identify patterns of drug use that 
may be associated with such adverse events using the national pharmacovigilance 
database known as Thai Vigibase.
METHOD: Muscle-related adverse events involving statins in the Thai Vigibase 
from 1996 to December 2009 were identified. For each report, the following 
information was extracted: patient demographics, co-morbidities, detailed 
information of adverse event, detailed information of suspected drug, treatment 
and outcome, as well as causality assessment and quality of reports. Descriptive 
statistics were performed for all study variables.
RESULTS: A total of 198 cases of statin-associated muscle-related adverse events 
were identified. Mean age was 61.4 ± 12.4 years of age and 59.6% were female. 
Simvastatin, atorvastatin, rosuvastatin and cerivastatin were implicated as the 
suspected drug in 163 (82.3%), 24 (12.1%), 10 (5.1%) and 1 (0.5%) cases, 
respectively. Rhabdomyolysis accounted for 55.6% of all muscle-related adverse 
events. Drug interactions known to enhance such toxicity of statins were 
identified in 40.9% of the total set of reports. Similar to studies from Western 
countries, fibrates, HIV protease inhibitors, non-dihydropyridine calcium 
channel blockers, azole antifungals and macrolides were commonly found in such 
cases. Interestingly, colchicine has been identified as the second most common 
drug interaction in our database. Case fatality rates were 0.9, 1.6 and 16.7%, 
when there were 0, 1 and ≥2 interacting drugs, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Characteristics of muscle-related adverse events with statins in 
the Thai population showed some similarities and differences compared with 
Western countries. Such similarities included advanced age, female sex, certain 
co-morbidities and drug interactions. While the majority of interacting drugs 
are well known, a big proportion of cases of statin-colchicine interaction 
attributed to long-term use of colchicine in Thailand was noted and should be 
further investigated. Based on these results, an attempt to avoid dangerous and 
well-known drug interactions among statin users should be implemented 
nationwide.

DOI: 10.1007/s40264-013-0055-5
PMID: 23615756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]