=== PubMed: furosemide drug interactions diuretic electrolyte ototoxicity ===
1. Eur Heart J. 1992 Dec;13 Suppl G:96-103. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/13.suppl_g.96.

Adverse reactions to diuretics.

Prichard BN(1), Owens CW, Woolf AS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, University College, London, U.K.

Diuretics can result in various undesired biochemical changes, such as 
impotence, skin rashes, nausea, dizziness and lethargy as well as subjective 
side effects. The side effects are mostly predictable, their effects depending 
on both the circulatory blood volume and on the transport of water and solute in 
the renal tubules. Two of the commonest side effects are mild hypovolaemia, when 
any diuretic is used, and mild hypokalaemia when the non-potassium-sparing 
diuretics, such as thiazides and frusemide are used. Its occurrence is dose 
dependent and can be corrected by potassium supplements, but potassium-retaining 
diuretics, which also correct the often associated fall in serum magnesium, are 
preferable. Many reports link hypokalaemia with cardiac arrhythmias, but some 
dispute this association in the absence of the concomitant use of digoxin. 
Hyponatraemia rarely occurs, but can be life threatening. Calcium excretion is 
markedly reduced, but unlike other electrolyte disturbances from diuretics, this 
may be valuable: some suggest diuretics have an anti-osteoporotic action. 
Diuretics increase glucose and insulin resistance and should be used sparingly 
in diabetics. They rarely cause a non-ketotic hyperosmolar coma. Urate is 
raised, but clinical gout is not common. Cholesterol elevation has been reported 
in some studies, but long-term studies indicate that lipid changes are minor. 
Other rare side effects are not predictable from their pharmacological actions 
and these include the occurrence of skin rashes, thrombocytopenia, pancreatitis 
and interstitial nephritis; and ototoxicity from frusemide.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/13.suppl_g.96
PMID: 1486914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Arch Inst Cardiol Mex. 1981 May-Jun;51(3):291-303.

[Pharmacologic bases of cardiovascular therapy with diuretics].

[Article in Spanish]

Reyes AJ.

Diuretics may have high, medium or low diuretic potency and their main site of 
diuretic action at the ascending limb of Henle's loop or at different 
biochemical sites of the distal tubulus. Loop diuretics have high diuretic 
potency, act abruptly, are not antihypertensives when prescribed as a 
monotherapy and are potentially ototoxic. The diuretics acting at the distal 
tubulus have a gentle time-course of diuretic activity and variable potencies 
and other properties. The mose frequent side-effect of diuretics is hypokalemia, 
whose development may be partially prevented by the prescription of a sodium 
restricted diet. Arrhythmias provoked by diuretics-induced hypokalaemia should 
be treated with magnesium and potassium. The most frequent drug interaction of 
diuretics is with unspecific inhibitors of prostaglandin's synthesis (aspirin 
and indomethacin) which decrease diuretic effects. Diuretics are indicated in 
the treatment of acute heart failure because of their direct and indirect 
vasoactive properties, in the treatment of chronic cardiac insufficiency because 
of their diuretic and vasodilatatory properties and, those diuretics which show 
as antihypertensives, are first choice drugs in hypertension.

PMID: 7283541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]