=== PubMed: carbamazepine drug interactions enzyme inducer oral contraceptive ===
1. Epileptic Disord. 2014 Dec;16(4):409-31. doi: 10.1684/epd.2014.0714.

Interactions between antiepileptic drugs, and between antiepileptic drugs and 
other drugs.

Zaccara G(1), Perucca E(2).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Florence Health Authority, 
Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Pavia, and C. 
Mondino National Neurological Institute, Pavia, Italy.

Interactions between antiepileptic drugs, or between antiepileptic drugs and 
other drugs, can be pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic in nature. 
Pharmacokinetic interactions involve changes in absorption, distribution or 
elimination, whereas pharmacodynamic interactions involve synergism and 
antagonism at the site of action. Most clinically important interactions of 
antiepileptic drugs result from induction or inhibition of drug metabolism. 
Carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital and primidone are strong inducers of 
cytochrome P450 and glucuronizing enzymes (as well as P-glycoprotein) and can 
reduce the efficacy of co-administered medications such as oral anticoagulants, 
calcium antagonists, steroids, antimicrobial and antineoplastic drugs through 
this mechanism. Oxcarbazepine, eslicarbazepine acetate, felbamate, rufinamide, 
topiramate (at doses ≥ 200 mg/day) and perampanel (at doses ≥ 8 mg/day) have 
weaker inducing properties, and a lower propensity to cause interactions 
mediated by enzyme induction. Unlike enzyme induction, enzyme inhibition results 
in decreased metabolic clearance of the affected drug, the serum concentration 
of which may increase leading to toxic effects. Examples of important 
interactions mediated by enzyme inhibition include the increase in the serum 
concentration of phenobarbital and lamotrigine caused by valproic acid. There 
are also interactions whereby other drugs induce or inhibit the metabolism of 
antiepileptic drugs, examples being the increase in serum carbamazepine 
concentration by erythromycin, and the decrease in serum lamotrigine 
concentration by oestrogen-containing contraceptives. Pharmacodynamic 
interactions between antiepileptic drugs may also be clinically important. These 
interactions can have potentially beneficial effects, such as the therapeutic 
synergism of valproic acid combined with lamotrigine, or adverse effects, such 
as the reciprocal potentiation of neurotoxicity observed in patients treated 
with a combination of sodium channel blocking antiepileptic drugs.

DOI: 10.1684/epd.2014.0714
PMID: 25515681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2022 Jun;18(6):395-411. doi: 
10.1080/17425255.2022.2106214. Epub 2022 Aug 5.

Drug-drug interactions between psychotropic medications and oral contraceptives.

Schoretsanitis G(1)(2)(3), Deligiannidis KM(2)(3)(4), Paulzen M(5)(6), Spina 
E(7), de Leon J(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Hospital of 
Psychiatry, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Psychiatry Research, Northwell Health, Glen 
Oaks, New York. USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry at the Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine 
at Northwell/Hofstra, Hempstead, NY, USA.
(4)The Departments of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Molecular Medicine at the 
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, New York, USA.
(5)Alexianer Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen 
University, and JARA- Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen, Germany.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, 
Messina, Italy.
(8)Mental Health Research Center at Eastern State Hospital, Lexington, KY, USA.
(9)Biomedical Research Centre in Mental Health Net (CIBERSAM), Santiago Apostol 
Hospital, University of the Basque Country, Vitoria, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: This is a comprehensive overview of pharmacokinetic drug-drug 
interactions (DDIs) involving oral contraceptives (OCs) and psychotropic 
medications.
AREAS COVERED: Medline and Embase from inception to April 2021 were searched for 
DDIs between OCs and psychotropic medications. They included case reports/series 
and cross-sectional, cross-over, placebo-controlled studies of patient cohorts 
and healthy females. We classified DDIs as: combined hormonal contraceptives 
(CHCs) acting as victim drugs (i.e. affected by psychotropic co-medications), 
CHCs as perpetrators, (i.e. affecting the activity of psychotropic 
co-medications), progestin-derivatives as victim drugs and progestin-derivatives 
affecting psychotropic co-medications. Alteration ratios reflecting changes in 
pharmacokinetic parameters before and after the DDI were estimated to 
approximate the extent of the DDI.
EXPERT OPINION: Women taking antiepileptic agents with strong to moderate 
enzyme-inducing properties (carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin) or those 
with moderate to mild enzyme-inducing properties (cenobamate, clobazam, 
eslicarbazepine, felbamate, oxcarbazepine, rufinamide, topiramate) should avoid 
OCs. Daily doses of cytochrome P450 1A2 substrates including clozapine may need 
to be reduced by 50% in women taking concomitant CHCs. Compared to CHCs, the 
propensity of progestin-only pills for DDIs has been investigated less. We 
provide a summary table for clinicians containing recommendations based on 
literature and package inserts; whenever evidence was available, we provided 
dose-correction factors.

DOI: 10.1080/17425255.2022.2106214
PMID: 35876180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1990 Jun;18(6):472-84. doi: 
10.2165/00003088-199018060-00004.

Pharmacokinetic drug interactions with oral contraceptives.

Back DJ(1), Orme ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Liverpool, 
England.

Oral contraceptive steroids are used by an estimated 60 to 70 million women 
world-wide. Over the past 20 years there have been both case reports and 
clinical studies on the topic of drug interactions with these agents. Some of 
the interactions are of definite therapeutic relevance, whereas others can be 
discounted as being of no clinical significance. Pharmacological interactions 
between oral contraceptive steroids and other compounds may be of 2 kinds: (a) 
drugs may impair the efficacy of oral contraceptive steroids, leading to 
breakthrough bleeding and pregnancy (in a few cases, the activity of the 
contraceptive is enhanced); (b) oral contraceptive steroids may interfere with 
the metabolism of other drugs. A number of anticonvulsants (phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, carbamazepine) are enzyme-inducing agents and thereby increase the 
clearance of the oral contraceptive steroids. Valproic acid has no 
enzyme-inducing properties, and thus women on this anticonvulsant can rely on 
their low dose oral contraceptive steroids for contraceptive protection. 
Researchers are now beginning to unravel the molecular basis of this 
interaction, with evidence of specific forms of cytochrome P450 (P450IIC and 
IIIA gene families) being induced by phenobarbital. Rifampicin, the 
antituberculous drug, also induces a cytochrome P450 which is a product of the 
P450IIIA gene subfamily. This isozyme is one of the major forms involved in 
2-hydroxylation of ethinylestradiol. Broad spectrum antibiotics have been 
implicated in causing pill failure; case reports document the interaction, and 
general practitioners are convinced that it is real. The problem remains that 
there is still no firm clinical pharmacokinetic evidence which indicates that 
blood concentrations of oral contraceptive steroids are altered by antibiotics. 
However, perhaps this should not be a surprise, given that the incidence of the 
interaction may be very low. It is suggested that an individual at risk will 
have a low bioavailability of ethinylestradiol, a large enterohepatic 
recirculation and gut flora particularly susceptible to the antibiotic being 
used. Two drugs, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and paracetamol (acetaminophen), give 
rise to increased blood concentrations of ethinylestradiol due to competition 
for sulphation. The interactions could have some significance to women on oral 
contraceptive steroids who regularly take high doses of either drug. Although on 
theoretical grounds adsorbents (e.g. magnesium trisilicate, aLuminium hydroxide, 
activated charcoal and kaolin) could be expected to interfere with oral 
contraceptive efficacy, there is no firm evidence that this is the case. 
Similarly, there is no evidence that smoking alters the pharmacokinetics of oral 
contraceptive steroids. These agents are now well documented as being able to 
alter the pharmacokinetics of other concomitantly administered drugs.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PIP: The pharmacokinetics and clinical significance of the major drug 
interactions seen with oral contraceptives are reviewed, both drugs interfering 
with pill efficacy, and situations where pills interfere with action of other 
drugs. Drugs affecting contraceptive efficacy include anticonvulsants, 
antibiotics, rifampicin, griseofulvin, ascorbic acid, and acetaminophen. 
Phenytoin is the most common anticonvulsant reported to cause contraceptive 
failure. It as been established by measurements of steady-state ethinyl 
estradiol levels, sex hormone binding globulin levels, and pharmacokinetic drug 
concentration curves that both ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel levels are 
decreased during phenytoin and carbamazepine intake. Induction of certain 
cytochrome P450 isozymes is probably responsible. Neither the causation or even 
the existence of drug interaction with antibiotics is definitely known, although 
case reports of pregnancies abound. Rifampicin is an exception, where enzyme 
induction clearly occurs. Ascorbic acid and acetaminophen are atypical for 
increasing the therapeutic effect of ethinyl estradiol. The effect of 
benzodiazepines depends on the type of drug metabolism: drugs oxidized and 
nitroreduced, e.g. chlordiazepoxide, alprazolam, diazepam, and nitrazepam, 
exhibit reduced clearance during pill intake. Clearance of cyclosporin, 
prednisolone, alcohol, caffeine and theophylline are also slowed by orals. Pills 
accelerate clearance of salicylic acid and morphine.

DOI: 10.2165/00003088-199018060-00004
PMID: 2191822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1996 Sep;31(3):198-214. doi: 
10.2165/00003088-199631030-00004.

Clinically significant pharmacokinetic drug interactions with carbamazepine. An 
update.

Spina E(1), Pisani F, Perucca E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Messina, Italy.

Carbamazepine is one of the most commonly prescribed antiepileptic drugs and is 
also used in the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia and psychiatric disorders, 
particularly bipolar depression. Because of its widespread and long term use, 
carbamazepine is frequently prescribed in combination with other drugs, leading 
to the possibility of drug interactions. The most important interactions 
affecting carbamazepine pharmacokinetics are those resulting in induction or 
inhibition of its metabolism. Phenytoin, phenobarbital (phenobarbitone) and 
primidone accelerate the elimination of carbamazepine, probably by stimulating 
cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4, and reduce plasma carbamazepine concentrations to a 
clinically important extent. Inhibition of carbamazepine metabolism and 
elevation of plasma carbamazepine to potentially toxic concentrations can be 
caused by stiripentol, remacemide, acetazolamide, macrolide antibiotics, 
isoniazid, metronidazole, certain antidepressants, verapamil, diltiazem, 
cimetidine, danazol and (dextropropoxyphene) propoxyphene. In other cases, toxic 
symptoms may result from elevated plasma concentrations of the active metabolite 
carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide, due to the inhibition of epoxide hydrolase by 
valproic acid (sodium valproate), valpromide, valnoctamide and progabide. 
Carbamazepine is a potent inducer of CYP3A4 and other oxidative enzyme system in 
the liver, and it may also increase glucuronyltransferase activity. This results 
in the acceleration of the metabolism of concurrently prescribed 
anticonvulsants, particularly valproic acid, clonazepam, ethosuximide, 
lamotrigine, topiramate, tiagabine and remacemide. The metabolism of many other 
drugs such as tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, steroid oral 
contraceptives, glucocorticoids, oral anticoagulants, cyclosporin, theophylline, 
chemotherapeutic agents and cardiovascular drugs can also be induced, leading to 
a number of clinically relevant drug interactions. Interactions with 
carbamazepine can usually be predicted on the basis of the pharmacological 
properties of the combined drug, particularly with respect to its therapeutic 
index, site of metabolism and ability to affect specific drug metabolising 
isoenzymes. Avoidance of unnecessary polypharmacy, selection of alternative 
agents with lower interaction potential, and careful dosage adjustments based on 
serum drug concentration monitoring and clinical observation represent the 
mainstays for the minimisation of risks associated with these interactions.

DOI: 10.2165/00003088-199631030-00004
PMID: 8877250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]