=== PubMed: alprazolam drug interactions benzodiazepine cns depression ===
1. J Psychopharmacol. 2024 Dec;38(12):1122-1136. doi: 10.1177/02698811241282777. 
Epub 2024 Oct 11.

Cognitive effects, pharmacokinetics, and safety of zuranolone administered alone 
or with alprazolam or ethanol in healthy adults in a phase 1 trial.

Dunbar J(1), Walling DP(2), Hassman HA(3), Jain R(4), Czysz A(1), Nandy I(1), 
Ona V(1), Moseley MK(5), Levin S(5), Maruff P(6).

Author information:
(1)Sage Therapeutics, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)CenExel CNS, Los Alamitos, CA, USA.
(3)CenExel Hassman Research Institute, Marlton, NJ, USA.
(4)Texas Tech University School of Medicine, Austin, TX, USA.
(5)Biogen, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(6)Cogstate, New Haven, CT, USA.

BACKGROUND: Zuranolone is an oral, once-daily, 14-day treatment course approved 
for adults with postpartum depression in the United States.
AIMS: To assess cognitive effects, pharmacokinetics, and safety of zuranolone, 
alone or with alprazolam/ethanol.
METHODS: This was a phase 1, two-part, two-period, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled crossover trial. Participants received zuranolone 50 mg or 
placebo once daily for 9 days, and additionally received alprazolam (1 mg, Part 
A), ethanol (males: 0.7 g/kg; females: 0.6 g/kg, Part B), or corresponding 
placebo on days 1, 5, and 9. Within each part, participants received all 
treatment combinations. Cognition was assessed using a computerized test 
battery; pharmacokinetics and safety were also evaluated.
RESULTS: All participants (Part A, N = 24; Part B, N = 25) received ⩾1 dose of 
zuranolone/placebo. Compared to placebo, zuranolone produced small-to-moderate 
cognitive decline (Cohen's |d| = 0.126-0.76); effects were larger with 
alprazolam (Cohen's |d| = 0.523-0.93) and ethanol (Cohen's |d| = 0.345-0.88). 
Zuranolone coadministration with alprazolam (Cohen's |d| = 0.6-1.227) or ethanol 
(Cohen's |d| = 0.054-0.5) generally worsened cognitive decline when compared 
with zuranolone alone. Maximal pharmacodynamic effects occurred at approximately 
5 h and were resolved by 12 h postbaseline. No pharmacokinetic interactions were 
observed. Incidence of adverse events was similar between groups; most events 
were mild or moderate in severity.
CONCLUSION: A general small-to-moderate magnitude decline in cognition occurred 
with zuranolone alone. Coadministration with alprazolam/ethanol increased the 
magnitude, but not the duration, of effects compared with single-agent 
administration. Zuranolone prescribers and patients should be aware of the 
potential for increased central nervous system-depressant effects if 
coadministered with GABAergic active compounds such as alprazolam and ethanol.

DOI: 10.1177/02698811241282777
PMCID: PMC11531078
PMID: 39394685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: David P Walling 
has received grants or contracts from Acadia, Alkermes, Allergan, Avanir, 
Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Cerevel, Indivior, IntraCellular, Janssen, J&J 
PRD, Karuna, Lundbeck, Lupin, Lyndra, Merck, Neurocrine, Novartis, Noven, 
Otsuka, Pfizer, Roche, Sage, Sunovion, Takeda; and consulting fees from Biogen, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Lyndra, Merck, and Otsuka.Howard A Hassman is a 
current employee of CenExel Hassman Research Institute, an independent research 
site that conducts investigator-initiated and industry-sponsored pharmaceutical 
trials. He has no conflicts of interest or bias in the conclusions of the 
current investigation or promotion of the current study results.Paul Maruff is 
an employee of Cogstate Ltd. and may hold stock and/or stock options.Rakesh Jain 
reports research funding from AbbVie, Lilly, Lundbeck, Otsuka, Pfizer, Shire, 
and Takeda; participation on advisory boards for Adamas, Alkermes, Corium, 
Eisai, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Neos Therapeutics, Neurocrine 
Biosciences, Otsuka, Pamlab, Pfizer, Sage, Shire, Sunovion, Supernus, Takeda, 
Teva, and Usona; honoraria for speakers’ bureaus from AbbVie, Alkermes, 
Almatica, Axsome, Corium, Eisai, Intra-Cellular Therapies, Ironshore 
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Neos Therapeutics, Otsuka, 
Pamlab, Pfizer, Shire, Sumitomo, Sunovion, Takeda, Tris Pharmaceuticals, and 
Viatris; and consulting fees from AbbVie, Acadia, Adamas, Alfasigma, Alkermes, 
Almatica, Axsome, Biogen, Boehringer Ingleheim, Cingulate Therapeutics, Corium, 
Eisai, Evidera, Impel, Janssen, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Neos Therapeutics, 
Neurocrine Biosciences, Osmotica, Otsuka, Pamlab, Pfizer, Sage, Shire, Sumitomo, 
Sunovion, Supernus, Takeda, Teva, Transcend Therapeutics, and Viatris.Andy Czysz 
was an employee of Sage Therapeutics, Inc., at the time that the study was 
completed, and may hold stock and/or stock options.Indrani Nandy, Victor Ona, 
and Joi Dunbar are employees of Sage Therapeutics, Inc., and may hold stock 
and/or stock options.Margaret K Moseley and Seth Levin are employees of Biogen 
Inc. and may hold stock.


2. Future Med Chem. 2025 Mar;17(6):681-692. doi: 10.1080/17568919.2025.2476388. 
Epub 2025 Mar 17.

Expecting medication misuse: a proactive approach to drug discovery to prevent 
fatal overdose.

Carry E(1), Vasilatis A(1), Johnson AL(2), Ryan JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Drug Discovery, Zena Therapeutics Inc., North Brunswick, NJ, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Research Summer Internship Program, National 
Institute of Drug Abuse, North Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Misuse of central nervous system (CNS) depressants (alprazolam, fentanyl, etc.) 
is a major cause of fatal overdose, with a high prevalence of deaths involving 
polydrug interactions from the victim's own prescriptions. Thus, there is an 
urgent need to improve the safety of CNS depressants to prevent fatalities. 
Pharmacological pursuits aiming to prevent harm through the design of 
non-addictive alternatives have either failed before clinical trials or produced 
mediocre treatment alternatives. Therefore, we propose a new perspective for 
medicinal chemists: rather than aiming to prevent misuse, we must design new 
central nervous system (CNS) depressants under the expectation of misuse. By 
shifting the design focus to partial modulators rather than full agonists, we 
can develop novel chemical entities (NCEs) that intrinsically minimize physical 
harm caused by misuse without sacrificing therapeutic efficacy. In this 
perspective, we provide an overview of the two most widely misused classes of 
medications (opioid and GABAA receptor modulators) in relation to 
pharmacodynamic properties and clinical outcomes. We then suggest a drug 
discovery pathway focused on physiological parameters. It is our opinion that 
this approach would dramatically decrease the lethality of overdose and improve 
outcomes of treatments for pain, anxiety, and withdrawal from alcohol, 
benzodiazepines, and opioids.

DOI: 10.1080/17568919.2025.2476388
PMCID: PMC11938974
PMID: 40091621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant affiliations or 
financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest 
in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the 
manuscript. This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria, stock ownership 
or options, expert testimony, grants or patents received or pending, or 
royalties.


3. J Psychiatr Res. 2022 Jul;151:299-303. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2022.04.033. 
Epub 2022 May 1.

Population-based signals of benzodiazepine drug interactions associated with 
unintentional traumatic injury.

Pham Nguyen TP(1), Soprano SE(2), Hennessy S(3), Brensinger CM(2), Bilker WB(4), 
Miano TA(2), Acton EK(5), Horn JR(6), Chung SP(7), Dublin S(8), Oslin DW(9), 
Wiebe DJ(10), Leonard CE(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Translational Center of Excellence for Neuroepidemiology and Neurology 
Outcomes Research, Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of 
Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Leonard Davis 
Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(4)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of 
Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Translational Center of Excellence for Neuroepidemiology and Neurology 
Outcomes Research, Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Biostatistics, 
Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)AthenaHealth, Inc., Watertown, MA, USA.
(8)Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute, Kaiser Permanente 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public 
Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Mental Illness Research, Education, and 
Clinical Center, Corporal Michael J. Crescenz Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Leonard Davis 
Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Penn Injury Science Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(11)Center for Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training, Center for Clinical 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology, and Informatics, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Leonard Davis 
Institute of Health Economics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA. Electronic address: celeonar@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Benzodiazepine receptor agonists and related medications, such as Z-drugs and 
dual orexin receptor antagonists (BZDs), have been associated with unintentional 
traumatic injury due to their central nervous system (CNS)-depressant effects. 
Drug-drug interactions (DDIs) may contribute to the known relationship between 
BZD use and unintentional traumatic injury, yet evidence is still lacking. We 
conducted high-throughput pharmacoepidemiologic screening using the 
self-controlled case series design in a large US commercial health insurance 
database to identify potentially clinically relevant DDI signals among new users 
of BZDs. We used conditional Poisson regression to estimate rate ratios (RRs) 
between each co-exposure (vs. not) and unintentional traumatic injury (primary 
outcome), typical hip fracture (secondary outcome), and motor vehicle crash 
(secondary outcome). We identified 48 potential DDI signals (1.1%, involving 39 
unique co-dispensed drugs), i.e., with statistically significant elevated 
adjusted RRs for injury. Signals were strongest for DDI pairs involving 
zolpidem, lorazepam, temazepam, alprazolam, eszopiclone, triazolam, and 
clonazepam. We also identified four potential DDI signals for typical hip 
fracture, but none for motor vehicle crash. Many signals have biologically 
plausible explanations through additive or synergistic pharmacodynamic effects 
of co-dispensed antidepressants, opioids, or muscle relaxants on CNS depression, 
impaired psychomotor and cognitive function, and/or somnolence. While other 
signals that lack an obvious mechanism may represent true associations that 
place patients at risk of injury, it is also prudent to consider the roles of 
chance, reverse causation, and/or confounding by indication, which merit further 
exploration. Given the high-throughput nature of our investigation, findings 
should be interpreted as hypothesis generating.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2022.04.033
PMCID: PMC9513701
PMID: 35526445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interest Dr. Pham Nguyen 
receives support from Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc., unrelated to this project. 
Dr. Leonard is an Executive Committee Member of and Dr. Hennessy founded and 
directs the University of Pennsylvania’s Center for Pharmacoepidemiology 
Research and Training. The Center receives funds from Pfizer and Sanofi to 
support pharmacoepidemiology education. Dr. Leonard recently received honoraria 
from the American College of Clinical Pharmacy Foundation, the University of 
Massachusetts, and the University of Florida. Dr. Leonard receives support for 
conference travel from John Wiley & Sons. Dr. Leonard is a Special Government 
Employee of the United States (US) Food and Drug Administration and consults for 
their Reagan-Udall Foundation. Dr. Leonard’s spouse is an employee of Merck; 
neither Dr. Leonard nor his spouse own stock in the company. Dr. Horn is 
coauthor and publisher of The Top 100 Drug Interactions: A Guide to Patient 
Management and a consultant to Urovant Sciences and Seegnal US. Dr. Bilker 
serves on multiple data safety monitoring boards for Genentech. Dr. Dublin has 
research funding from GlaxoSmithKline. Dr. Hennessy has consulted for multiple 
pharmaceutical companies. All other authors declared no competing interests for 
this work. All authors read, revised, and approved the manuscript. We have not 
submitted or published this work elsewhere in any form. The authors confirm 
contributions to the submitted work as follows: study conception and design: 
CEL, SH, SES, TPPN, WBB, TAM, EKA, SPC, SD, DWO, DJW; data analysis: CMB; 
interpretation of results: CEL, TPPN; drafting of the manuscript: TPPN, SES. 
Disclosures Dr. Pham Nguyen receives support from Acadia Pharmaceuticals Inc., 
unrelated to this project. Dr. Leonard is an Executive Committee Member of and 
Dr. Hennessy founded and directs the University of Pennsylvania’s Center for 
Pharmacoepidemiology Research and Training. The Center receives funds from 
Pfizer and Sanofi to support pharmacoepidemiology education. Dr. Leonard 
recently received honoraria from the American College of Clinical Pharmacy 
Foundation, the University of Massachusetts, and the University of Florida. Dr. 
Leonard receives support for conference travel from John Wiley & Sons. Dr. 
Leonard is a Special Government Employee of the United States (US) Food and Drug 
Administration and consults for their Reagan-Udall Foundation. Dr. Leonard’s 
spouse is an employee of Merck; neither Dr. Leonard nor his spouse own stock in 
the company. Dr. Horn is coauthor and publisher of The Top 100 Drug 
Interactions: A Guide to Patient Management and a consultant to Urovant Sciences 
and Seegnal US. Dr. Bilker serves on multiple data safety monitoring boards for 
Genentech. Dr. Dublin has research funding from GlaxoSmithKline. Dr. Hennessy 
has consulted for multiple pharmaceutical companies. All other authors declared 
no competing interests for this work.