=== PubMed: metformin drug interactions lactic acidosis renal contrast ===
1. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2000 Sep 30;144(40):1903-5.

[Prevention of lactic acidosis due to metformin intoxication in contrast media 
nephropathy].

[Article in Dutch]

Landewé-Cleuren S(1), van Zwam WH, de Bruin TW, de Haan M.

Author information:
(1)Academisch Ziekenhuis, AZ Maastricht.

Comment in
    Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2000 Sep 30;144(40):1900-2.

Use of the oral antidiabetic drug metformin may cause lactic acidosis, a rare 
but life-threatening complication, especially in patients with renal function 
loss. Since intravenously administered iodide-containing contrast media may 
cause renal function disturbances precautions should be taken in 
metformin-treated patients for whom a radiological study with intravenous 
contrast media is considered. In diabetic patients who use metformin a serum 
creatinine concentration should be measured prior to the radiological study. If 
the serum creatinine is within normal limits (< 130 mumol/l), metformin can be 
continued and the examination performed. If the serum creatinine concentration 
is increased (> or = 130 mumol/l), metformin should be discontinued and replaced 
by another antidiabetic drug if necessary. The radiological procedure with 
intravenous contrast media should be postponed for 48 hours. If such a procedure 
cannot be postponed, additional measures to prevent lactic acidosis (hydration, 
monitoring of the renal function) should be taken.

PMID: 11045136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Radiology. 2010 Jan;254(1):261-9. doi: 10.1148/radiol.09090690.

Systematic review of current guidelines, and their evidence base, on risk of 
lactic acidosis after administration of contrast medium for patients receiving 
metformin.

Goergen SK(1), Rumbold G, Compton G, Harris C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Southern Health, 246 Clayton Rd, Clayton, 
VIC 3168, Australia. Stacy.Goergen@southernhealth.org.au

Comment in
    Radiology. 2010 Jan;254(1):20-1. doi: 10.1148/radiol.09091700.
    Radiology. 2010 Aug;256(2):672-3; author reply 673. doi: 
10.1148/radiol.100566.

PURPOSE: To systematically review evidence about the relationship between 
metformin administration and the use of iodinated contrast medium and risk of 
lactic acidosis (LA) and to assess the quality of five current guidelines for 
use of contrast medium in patients who are taking metformin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A search strategy was developed by using search 
termsrelated to metformin, contrast media, and LA. Searches were conducted in 
MEDLINE (Ovid), all Evidence-based Medicine Reviews (Ovid), EMBASE, and Cochrane 
library databases and were augmented with searches for evidence-based guidelines 
on radiology and evidence-based medicine Web sites by using the Google Internet 
search engine. Guidelines were appraised by two independent reviewers by using 
the Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation Collaboration Instrument. 
Other studies were appraised by using structured appraisal checklists.
RESULTS: Five guidelines were identified and five empirical studies met 
inclusion criteria. All guidelines had poor scores on some Appraisal of 
Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) Collaboration criteria; poorer 
scores tended to occur in relation to objective assessment of rigor of guideline 
development, editorial independence, and applicability of the guideline to 
clinical practice. Lack of agreement was observed among guidelines about the 
need to stop taking metformin after contrast medium is administered, risk of LA 
in patients with normal renal function before contrast medium injection, 
recommended method of measuring renal function, and values used to define 
abnormal function. The evidence that was used as a basis for determining the 
guidelines for metformin administration, use of contrast medium, and risk of LA 
consisted of a limited number of observational studies, including case reports, 
summaries of case reports, and case series (National Health and Medical Research 
Council of Australia level IV-V evidence). More important, it was not apparent 
that a systematic search strategy had been used to identify the studies 
referenced by the guidelines nor that the referenced studies had been appraised. 
Individual guideline recommendations were not clearly connected to cited 
references.
CONCLUSION: Substantial inconsistencies exist between the recommendations of the 
five international guidelines about contrast medium administration in patients 
who are taking metformin. These are, in part, caused by the low level of 
evidence underpinning guideline recommendations.

DOI: 10.1148/radiol.09090690
PMID: 20032157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Clin Radiol. 1999 Jan;54(1):29-33. doi: 10.1016/s0009-9260(99)91236-9.

Metformin and contrast media--a dangerous combination?

McCartney MM(1), Gilbert FJ, Murchison LE, Pearson D, McHardy K, Murray AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.

Metformin is a biguanide used to treat type II diabetes mellitus. Since the 
recent introduction of this drug into the United States there has been 
considerable interest in metformin associated lactic acidosis (MALA) following 
intravenous contrast media. The Royal College of Radiologists published advice 
in November, 1996 (Advice to Members and Fellows with regard to 
metformin-induced lactic acidosis and X-ray contrast medium agents, RCR 
Publication) supporting the manufacturers' advice that metformin should not be 
used in the 48 h before or after intravenous (i.v.) contrast medium. We 
performed a systematic review of the literature and this has shown that almost 
all reported cases of MALA following i.v. contrast medium occurred where there 
was either pre-existing poor renal function or another contraindication to 
metformin usage. There has been only one reported case of lactic acidosis 
following the use of intravenous contrast medium in a patient with normal renal 
function. We suggest that the Royal College of Radiologists' advice should be 
modified and that it is safe to give i.v. contrast medium to patients on 
metformin with normal renal function.

DOI: 10.1016/s0009-9260(99)91236-9
PMID: 9915507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Can Assoc Radiol J. 1998 Jun;49(3):161-6.

Metformin and contrast media: where is the conflict?

Rasuli P(1), Hammond DI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Ottawa, Ont.

Intravascular administration of iodinated contrast media to patients who are 
receiving metformin, an oral antidiabetic agent, can result in lactic acidosis. 
However, this rare complication occurs only if the contrast medium causes renal 
failure, and the patient continues to take metformin in the presence of renal 
failure. Because metformin is excreted primarily by the kidneys, continued 
intake of metformin after the onset of renal failure results in a toxic 
accumulation of this drug and subsequent lactic acidosis. To avoid this 
complication, metformin must be withheld after the administration of the 
contrast agent for 48 hours, during which the contrast-induced renal failure 
becomes clinically apparent. If renal function is normal at 48 hours, the 
metformin can be restarted. There is no scientific justification for withholding 
metformin for 48 hours before administration of the contrast medium, as 
currently recommended in the package insert. The authors review the pharmacology 
of metformin and present a departmental policy for managing patients with 
diabetes who receive metformin and who require intravascular administration of 
iodinated contrast media.

PMID: 9640281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]