=== PubMed: valproate drug interactions anticonvulsant teratogenic ===
1. Neuropsychopharmacol Rep. 2021 Sep;41(3):336-351. doi: 10.1002/npr2.12196.
Epub  2021 Jul 23.

Neuropharmacology of Antiseizure Drugs.

Hakami T(1).

Author information:
(1)The Faculty of Medicine, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Antiseizure drugs (ASDs) are the primary therapy for epilepsy, with 
more than 20 drugs introduced into clinical practice to date. These drugs are 
typically grouped by their mechanisms of action and therapeutic spectrum. This 
article aims to educate non-neurologists and medical students about the new 
frontiers in the pharmacology of ASDs and presents the current state of the 
literature on the efficacy and tolerability of these agents.
METHODS: Randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and evidence-based 
meta-analyses of ASD efficacy and tolerability as initial monotherapy for 
epileptic seizures and syndromes were identified in PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane 
Library, and Elsevier Clinical Pharmacology.
RESULTS: The choice of ASD varies primarily according to the seizure type. 
Practical guidelines for ASD selection in patients with new-onset and 
drug-resistant epilepsy were recently published. The guidelines have shown that 
the newer-generation drugs, which have unique mechanistic and pharmacokinetic 
properties, are better tolerated but have similar efficacy compared with the 
older drugs. Several ASDs are effective as first-line monotherapy in focal 
seizures, including lamotrigine, carbamazepine, phenytoin, levetiracetam, and 
zonisamide. Valproate remains the first-line drug for many patients with 
generalized and unclassified epilepsies. However, valproate should be avoided, 
if possible, in women of childbearing potential because of teratogenicity. 
Toxicity profile precludes several drugs from use as first-line treatment, for 
example, vigabatrin, felbamate, and rufinamide.
CONCLUSIONS: Antiseizure drugs have different pharmacologic profiles that should 
be considered when selecting and prescribing these agents for epilepsy. These 
include pharmacokinetic properties, propensity for drug-drug interactions, and 
adverse effects.

© 2021 The Authors. Neuropsychopharmacology Reports published by John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Japanese Society of 
Neuropsychopharmacology.

DOI: 10.1002/npr2.12196
PMCID: PMC8411307
PMID: 34296824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflict of interest.


2. Epilepsia. 1992;33 Suppl 1:S13-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1992.tb05896.x.

Drug interactions in epilepsy.

Brodie MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, 
Scotland.

The abolition of seizures using a single antiepileptic agent can be expected in 
more than 80% of patients, although not necessarily with the first drug tried. 
The remainder often receive polypharmacy, and current evidence suggests that 
perhaps only around 10% of these benefit significantly in terms of improved 
seizure control. Many more experience complicated drug interactions. 
Carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone (metabolized in part to 
phenobarbital) all induce the synthesis of hepatic monooxygenase and conjugating 
enzymes. This will result in an acceleration in the metabolism of other 
lipid-soluble drugs with likely attenuation of their pharmacological effects. 
Valproate, on the other hand, is a minor enzyme inhibitor. Pharmacokinetic 
interactions are almost invariable when more than one antiepileptic drug is 
coprescribed. The extent and direction of interactions with combinations of 
these drugs are varied and unpredictable. Discontinuation of an enzyme inducer 
or inhibitor will influence the concentrations of the remaining drug(s). 
Pharmacodynamic interactions also cause problems in epileptic patients. A number 
of commonly prescribed psychoactive drugs, such as tricyclic antidepressants and 
neuroleptics, can worsen seizure control by reducing the convulsion threshold. 
In addition, there seems little doubt that ethanol abuse and withdrawal can 
precipitate seizures in susceptible patients. Antiepileptic polypharmacy is more 
likely to impair cognitive function than the same drugs used singly. In 
addition, the more antiepileptic drugs received by a patient in the first 
trimester of pregnancy, the higher the risk of teratogenesis in the exposed 
infant. Drug interactions prolong and complicate the process of new drug 
assessment, particularly when introduced in treated patients with refractory 
epilepsy. The candidate antiepileptic drug may alter the concentration of 
concomitant therapy, or its own breakdown may be influenced by coprescribed 
enzyme inducers or inhibitors. Even if the new drug is excreted unchanged by the 
kidney, unexpected interactions can be uncovered. Pharmacodynamic interactions 
need not always be detrimental. Currently, there is no rational approach to the 
treatment of intractable epilepsy. As more new drugs with single mechanisms of 
action become available, the potential exists for combining these 
synergistically. This approach may revolutionize the pharmacological management 
of the epileptic patient in the 21st century.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1992.tb05896.x
PMID: 1644052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1998 Feb 7;142(6):289-93.

[Antiepileptics].

[Article in Dutch]

Overweg J(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituut voor Epilepsiebestrijding Meer en Bosch, De Cruquiushoeve, 
Heemstede.

Despite introduction of new antiepileptic drugs the established drugs phenytoin, 
carbamazepine and valproate still provide the treatment of choice in most forms 
of epilepsy, being efficacious in approximately two-thirds of all newly referred 
patients. In 20-60% of patients resistant to treatment with the older drugs, a 
50% reduction of seizure frequency can be achieved by adding ethosuximide, 
clobazam, vigabatrine, oxcarbazepine, lamotrigine, felbamate, tiagabine or 
topiramate to the classic treatment. The majority of the new drugs are free of 
the problematic enzyme induction of the older compounds, making monotherapy as 
well as combination therapy much easier. To what extent the new antiepileptic 
drugs are going to be used for the treatment of patients with epilepsy will 
depend on the analysis of cost and benefits. This will be based on efficacy, 
side effects, interactions and teratogenicity of these new compounds.

PMID: 9562728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Psychopharmacol Bull. 2003;37 Suppl 2:43-53.

Divalproex and epilepsy.

Willmore LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Saint Louis University School of Medicine, 1402 South Grand Boulevard (M226), 
St. Louis, MO 63104, USA. willmore@slu.edu

Valproic acid, a branched chain carboxylic acid, has a broad spectrum of action 
as an antiepilepsy drug. While effective in myoclonus syndromes and absence 
epilepsy, the drug has efficacy for patients with generalized convulsive and 
partial seizures as well. Mechanisms of action are similar to other drugs used 
to treat epilepsy, in that valproate limits sustained repetitive firing by 
actions on the voltage sensitive sodium channel. However, the drug facilitates 
the removal of glutamate from synaptic regions by up regulating glial glutamate 
transporters while prolonging the action of GABA by limiting production of 
inhibitory transmitter transporter proteins. Adverse effects include 
hepatotoxicity that requires informing patients and establishing clinical 
monitoring plans. Teratogenicity occurs with valproate and requires informing 
patients and careful monitoring in women during pregnancy.

PMID: 15021860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]