=== PubMed: sitagliptin drug interactions hypoglycemia renal ===
1. Transplant Rev (Orlando). 2017 Apr;31(2):69-77. doi:
10.1016/j.trre.2016.09.001.  Epub 2016 Sep 14.

Drug-drug interactions between immunosuppressants and antidiabetic drugs in the 
treatment of post-transplant diabetes mellitus.

Vanhove T(1), Remijsen Q(2), Kuypers D(3), Gillard P(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, 
and Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, University Hospitals 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: thomas.vanhove@uzleuven.be.
(2)Department of Medical Affairs, AstraZeneca BeLux, Uccle, Belgium.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven - University of Leuven, 
and Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, University Hospitals 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Laboratory and Clinic of Experimental Medicine and Endocrinology, KU Leuven - 
University of Leuven, and Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Post-transplant diabetes mellitus is a frequent complication of solid organ 
transplantation that generally requires treatment with lifestyle interventions 
and antidiabetic medication. A number of demonstrated and potential 
pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions (DDIs) exist between commonly used 
immunosuppressants and antidiabetic drugs, which are comprehensively summarized 
in this review. Cyclosporine (CsA) itself inhibits the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4 
enzyme and a variety of drug transporters. As a result, it increases exposure to 
repaglinide and sitagliptin, will likely increase the exposure to nateglinide, 
glyburide, saxagliptin, vildagliptin and alogliptin, and could theoretically 
increase the exposure to gliquidone and several sodium-glucose transporter 
(SGLT)-2 inhibitors. Currently available data, although limited, suggest that 
these increases are modest and, particularly with regard to gliptins and SGLT-2 
inhibitors, unlikely to result in hypoglycemia. The interaction with repaglinide 
is more pronounced but does not preclude concomitant use if repaglinide dose is 
gradually titrated. Mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine do not engage in DDIs 
with any antidiabetic drug. Although calcineurin inhibitors (CNIs) and mammalian 
target of rapamycin inhibitors (mTORi) are intrinsically prone to DDIs, their 
disposition is not influenced by metformin, pioglitazone, sulfonylureas (except 
possibly glyburide) or insulin. An effect of gliptins on the disposition of CNIs 
and mTORi is unlikely, but has not been definitively ruled out. Based on their 
disposition profiles, glyburide and canagliflozin could affect CNI and mTORi 
disposition although this requires further study. Finally, delayed gastric 
emptying as a result of glucagon-like peptide-1 agonists seems to have a 
limited, but not necessarily negligible effect on CNI disposition.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trre.2016.09.001
PMID: 27665059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2010 Aug;12(8):648-58. doi: 
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01212.x.

Pharmacokinetics of dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitors.

Scheen AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Diabetes, Nutrition and Metabolic Disorders and Division of 
Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, CHU Sart Tilman, University of 
Liège, Liège, Belgium. andre.scheen@chu.ulg.ac.be

Type 2 diabetes (T2DM) is a complex disease combining defects in insulin 
secretion and insulin action. New compounds have been developed for improving 
glucose-induced insulin secretion and glucose control, without inducing 
hypoglycaemia or weight gain. Dipeptidylpeptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors are new 
oral glucose-lowering agents, so-called incretin enhancers, which may be used as 
monotherapy or in combination with other antidiabetic compounds. Sitagliptin, 
vildaglipin and saxagliptin are already on the market in many countries, either 
as single agents or in fixed-dose combined formulations with metformin. Other 
DPP-4 inhibitors, such as alogliptin and linagliptin, are currently in late 
phase of development. The present paper summarizes and compares the main 
pharmacokinetics (PK) properties, that is, absorption, distribution, metabolism 
and elimination, of these five DPP-4 inhibitors. Available data were obtained in 
clinical trials performed in healthy young male subjects, patients with T2DM, 
and patients with either renal insufficiency or hepatic impairment. PK 
characteristics were generally similar in young healthy subjects and in 
middle-aged overweight patients with diabetes. All together gliptins have a good 
oral bioavailability which is not significantly influenced by food intake. 
PK/pharmacodynamics characteristics, that is, sufficiently prolonged half-life 
and sustained DPP-4 enzyme inactivation, generally allow one single oral 
administration per day for the management of T2DM; the only exception is 
vildagliptin for which a twice-daily administration is recommended because of a 
shorter half-life. DPP-4 inhibitors are in general not substrates for cytochrome 
P450 (except saxagliptin that is metabolized via CYP 3A4/A5) and do not act as 
inducers or inhibitors of this system. Several metabolites have been documented 
but most of them are inactive; however, the main metabolite of saxagliptin also 
exerts a significant DPP-4 inhibition and is half as potent as the parent 
compound. Renal excretion is the most important elimination pathway, except for 
linagliptin whose metabolism in the liver appears to be predominant. PK 
properties of gliptins, combined with their good safety profile, explain why no 
dose adjustment is necessary in elderly patients or in patients with mild to 
moderate hepatic impairment. As far as patients with renal impairment are 
concerned, significant increases in drug exposure for sitagliptin and 
saxagliptin have been reported so that appropriate reductions in daily dosages 
are recommended according to estimated glomerular filtration rate. The PK 
characteristics of DPP-4 inhibitors suggest that these compounds are not exposed 
to a high risk of drug-drug interactions. However, the daily dose of saxagliptin 
should be reduced when coadministered with potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors. In 
conclusion, besides their pharmacodynamic properties leading to effective 
glucose-lowering effect without inducing hypoglycaemia or weight gain, DPP-4 
inhibitors show favourable PK properties, which contribute to a good 
efficacy/safety ratio for the management of T2DM in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1463-1326.2010.01212.x
PMID: 20590741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Assoc Physicians India. 2025 Apr;73(4):e19-e25. doi: 10.59556/japi.73.0924.

Revisiting the Cardiorenal Safety of Sitagliptin in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A 
Literature Review.

Shah P(1), Tiwaskar M(2), Joshi A(3), Pendurthi B(4), Dharmadhikari S(5), Ahire 
P(6), Khandhedia C(6), Markandeywar N(7), Mane A(8), Mehta S(9).

Author information:
(1)Director, Department of Endocrinology, Gujarat Endocrine Centre, Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat, India.
(2)Consultant Physician, Shilpa Medical Research Centre, Mumbai, Maharashtra, 
India.
(3)Consultant in Charge Endocrinology, Department of Endocrinology, 
Bhaktivedanta Hospital and Research Institute, Thane, Maharashtra, India.
(4)Manager, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, Sun Pharma 
Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India, Corresponding Author.
(5)Senior Manager, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, Sun 
Pharma Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(6)Deputy General Manager, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, 
Sun Pharma Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(7)General Manager, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, Sun 
Pharma Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(8)Senior General Manager, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, 
Sun Pharma Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
(9)Senior Vice President, Department of Medical Affairs and Clinical Research, 
Sun Pharma Laboratories Limited, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a major public health problem globally, with 
significant socioeconomic ramifications for healthcare systems. Diabetes 
unquestionably contributes to both cardiovascular disease (CVD) and chronic 
renal disease. Hospitalization, low quality of life, and high mortality rate are 
inevitable in patients with this dual burden. As a result, the emphasis in 
diabetes care should also be on cardiorenal health. Glycemic control, as well as 
optimal management of cardiorenal risk factors and comorbidities, is required to 
eliminate cardiovascular (CV) morbidity and mortality related to T2D. 
Sitagliptin is a highly efficient and selective dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitor 
(DPP-4i) that improves glycemic control while having a low risk of hypoglycemia. 
It has neutral effects on body weight, low proclivity for pharmacokinetic 
interactions, and a favorable safety profile. Numerous clinical trials have 
proven that sitagliptin is CV- and renal-safe in T2D patients, even in those 
with obesity, old age, renal impairment (RI), and preexisting CVD. It also 
corrects hyperglycemia-induced osmotic diuresis and excessive filtration. In 
people with T2D who are at high CV risk or moderate-to-severe renal 
insufficiency, sitagliptin is documented as a well-tolerated treatment that does 
not augment the risk of CV and renal complications. Sitagliptin may effectively 
manage CV and renal complications in diabetes patients, considering its CV and 
renal safety.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2025.

DOI: 10.59556/japi.73.0924
PMID: 40200619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cardiol Rev. 2007 Sep-Oct;15(5):264-71. doi: 10.1097/CRD.0b013e318123f771.

Sitagliptin: a novel drug for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.

Choy M(1), Lam S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy and Allied 
Health Professions, St. John's University, Jamaica, New York 11439, USA. 
choym@stjohns.edu

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a common chronic disease that causes significant 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. The primary goal of treatment is to target 
glycemic control by maintaining the glycosylated hemoglobin level near 6-7% 
without predisposing patients to hypoglycemia. Diabetes results from a 
combination of increased hepatic glucose production, decreased insulin secretion 
from beta cells, and insulin resistance in the peripheral tissues. Currently 
available antidiabetic agents work by different mechanisms to lower blood 
glucose levels. Unfortunately, each of them has its tolerability and safety 
concerns that limit its use and dose titration. Sitagliptin is the first 
antidiabetic agent from the class of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 enzyme inhibitors. 
It increases the amount of circulating incretins, which stimulate insulin 
secretion and inhibit glucose production. Sitagliptin was approved by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use with diet and exercise to improve 
glycemic control in adult patients with type 2 diabetes. It can be used alone or 
in combination with metformin or a thiazolidinedione (pioglitazone or 
rosiglitazone) when treatment with either drug alone provides inadequate glucose 
control. The usual adult dose is 100 mg once daily. A dose of 25-50 mg once 
daily is recommended for patients with moderate-to-severe renal impairment. In 
randomized, placebo-controlled trials that lasted for up to 6 months, 
sitagliptin lowered glycosylated hemoglobin levels by 0.5-0.8%. In a 52-week 
clinical trial, sitagliptin was shown to be noninferior to glipizide as an 
add-on agent in patients inadequately controlled on metformin alone. Sitagliptin 
was well tolerated with the most common side effects being gastrointestinal 
complaints (up to 16%), including abdominal pain, nausea and diarrhea; 
hypoglycemia and body weight gain occurred at similar rates compared with 
placebo. Overall, sitagliptin provides a treatment option for patients with type 
2 diabetes as a monotherapy, or as an adjunct to metformin or a 
thiazolidinedione when patients achieve inadequate glycemic control while on 
either of the agents. It is also an alternative therapy for those patients who 
have contraindications or intolerability to other antidiabetic agents.

DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0b013e318123f771
PMID: 17700385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]