=== PubMed: endometriozis ===
1. Neuropsychopharmacol Hung. 2024 Sep;26(3):182-188.

[Summarising the efficiency of psychological interventions in the treatment of 
endometriosis].

[Article in Hungarian]

Környei-Horváth P(1), Illés S(2), Csenki-Knyihár A(2).

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem ÁOK Klinikai Pszichológia Tanszék.
(2)Semmelweis Egyetem, Szülészeti és Nőgyógyászati Klinika.

Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease affecting 5-10% of women 
resulting in several psychological impacts. Regarding the high prevalence as 
well as extensive somatic symptoms, this has become a growing issue of 
psychological research in recent years. Thanks to its rising importance the 
negative effect on quality of life, mood, and anxiety symptoms has been proven. 
Thus we aimed to organize psychological interventions affecting the mentioned 
constructs and also examine their efficiency and scientific standards. Our 
inclusion criteria referred to studies based on randomized controlled trials, 
systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. We selected seven types of interventions, 
such as psychoeducation, cognitive behavioural therapy, mindfulness-based 
methods, progressive muscle relaxation, yoga, physical activity, and complex 
programs. Regarding the quality of life, mood, and anxiety cognitive behavioural 
therapy and progressive muscle relaxation were the most effective methods, 
however, other interventions had promising results either. Besides, there is a 
growing demand for psychological and mind-body interventions, which should get a 
more important place in the primary care of endometriosis next to medical 
treatment. We find inevitable further high-quality examinations, and from the 
point of practice, we consider it crucial to implement current evidence-based 
methods in the psychological care of endometriosis. Keywords: , , , , , , , , , 
, , .

PMID: 39360492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Imaging Radionucl Ther. 2018 Feb 1;27(1):52-54. doi: 10.4274/mirt.77044.

Inguinal Endometriosis Visualized on I-131 Whole Body Scan.

Çayır D(1), Araz M(1), Apaydın M(2), Çakal E(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Health Sciences, Dışkapı Yıldırım Beyazıt Training and Research 
Hospital, Clinic of Nuclear Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)University of Health Sciences, Dışkapı Yıldırım Beyazıt Training and Research 
Hospital, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Ankara, Turkey.

We present a rare case with inguinal iodine-131 (I-131) uptake on whole body 
scan. The patient was suffering from a painful right inguinal mass during 
menstrual period, which was later sonographically and histopathologically 
confirmed to be an inguinal focus of endometriosis. Endometriosis is a 
previously reported site of radioiodine uptake and detection of radioiodine 
uptake in the inguinal region has also been described. Nevertheless, to the best 
of our knowledge, this is the first case report of I-131 uptake in an inguinal 
endometriosis focus. History and physical examination of the patient are both 
very important in identifying the etiology of the ectopic uptake sites on I-131 
whole body scan, and inguinal endometriosis should be kept in mind while 
reporting inguinal radioiodine uptake on I-131 whole body scan.

Publisher: Bu raporda iyot-131 (I-131) tüm vücut taramada inguinal bölgede 
tutulum saptanan nadir bir olguyu sunuyoruz. Menstrüel siklus sırasında ağrılı 
inguinal kitle şikayeti olan hastada, kitlenin daha sonra sonografik ve 
histopatolojik olarak inguinal endometriozis odağına ait olduğu konfirme edildi. 
Endometrioziste radyoaktif iyot tutulumu ve inguinal bölgede radyoaktif iyot 
tutulumunun saptanması daha önce bildirilmiştir; ancak inguinal endometriozis 
odağında I-131 tutulumu, bildiğimiz kadarıyla, ilk kez bu olguda sunulmaktadır. 
I-131 tüm vücut taramada ektopik tutulum alanlarının etiyolojisinin çözülmesinde 
hasta öyküsü ve fizik muayene çok önemli olup, I-131 tüm vücut taramada inguinal 
bölgede radyoaktif iyot tutulumu raporlanırken inguinal endometriozis de akılda 
bulundurulmalıdır. Anahtar kelimeler: Endometriozis, tüm vücut görüntüleme, 
iyot-131.

DOI: 10.4274/mirt.77044
PMCID: PMC5790976
PMID: 29393056

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No conflict of interest 
was declared by the authors.


3. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2020 Jan;26(1):148-151. doi: 
10.5505/tjtes.2018.62705.

A rare case of acute mechanical intestinal obstruction: Colonic endometriosis.

[Article in English]

Buldanlı MZ(1), Özemir İA(2), Yener O(2), Dölek Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Çankırı State Hospital, Çankırı-Turkey.
(2)Department of General Surgery, İstanbul Medeniyet University, Göztepe 
Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul-Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Pathology, Çankırı State Hospital, Çankırı-Turkey.

Endometriosis is a disease seen in women at reproductive age, characterized by 
extrauterine localization of endometrial tissue. Colonic endometriosis rarely 
causes acute mechanical intestinal obstruction (AMIO). It may also be presented 
with pelvic pain, dyspareunia, tenesmus, painful defecation related to the 
menstrual cycle. In the literature, 3-37% of the gastrointestinal location was 
reported and AMIO was observed in 7-23% of these cases. There are only few cases 
of mechanical obstruction related to sigmoid endometriosis mimicking colon 
malignancy. In this study, we aim to report a case of a 40-year-old patient with 
AMIO developed secondary to colonic endometriosis in light of the literature. 
The patient was discharged with full surgical recovery after the Hartmann 
procedure was performed, and the pathological diagnosis was reached as 
endometriosis. At the post-operative sixth-month colostomy, closure and 
bilateral oophorectomy were performed with the patient's will. The patient was 
discharged with surgical recovery and is still being regularly followed up. 
Endometriosis is a gynecological disease that may occur in all organ systems 
even though the most common location is the overs. Gastrointestinal located 
endometriosis should, therefore, be kept in mind in the etiology of AMIO in 
women at reproductive age and the related symptoms should be questioned in 
differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.5505/tjtes.2018.62705
PMID: 31942741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]