=== PubMed: febrile seizure ===
1. Eur J Pediatr. 2021 Apr;180(4):987-997. doi: 10.1007/s00431-020-03845-8. Epub 
2020 Oct 30.

Use of antipyretics for preventing febrile seizure recurrence in children: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Hashimoto R(1)(2), Suto M(3), Tsuji M(3), Sasaki H(4), Takehara K(3), Ishiguro 
A(5), Kubota M(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Postgraduate Education and Training, National Center for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan. 
hashimoto-r@ncchd.go.jp.
(2)Department of Health Policy, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan. hashimoto-r@ncchd.go.jp.
(3)Department of Health Policy, National Center for Child Health and 
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Medical Support Center for Japan Environment and Children's Study, National 
Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Center for Postgraduate Education and Training, National Center for Child 
Health and Development, 2-10-1 Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 157-8535, Japan.
(6)Division of Neurology, National Center for Child Health and Development, 
Tokyo, Japan.

The efficacy of antipyretics for preventing febrile seizure recurrence has been 
reported by a recent study, and the results might overturn previous evidence. We 
systematically reviewed the efficacy of antipyretics in the prevention of 
febrile seizure recurrence in children focused on the timing of its 
administration. We searched the Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register 
of Controlled Trials databases for randomized and quasi-randomized trials and 
prospective non-randomized studies of aged up to 60 months, diagnosed with 
febrile seizure, who were treated with antipyretics. Data were extracted from 
eight studies. Only one study reported that antipyretics prevented the 
recurrence of febrile seizures within the same fever episode (9.1% in the 
acetaminophen group vs. 23.5% in the control group, p < 0.01). Four studies 
found no evidence for the efficacy of antipyretics in preventing febrile seizure 
recurrence in distant fever episodes (odds ratio, 0.92; 95% confidence interval, 
0.57-1.48, for two randomized controlled studies).Conclusion: This review 
provides very limited support for the use of antipyretics in preventing febrile 
seizure recurrence within the same fever episode and no evidence for its use in 
distant fever episodes. New studies are required to evaluate this topic further 
and determine whether the effectiveness of antipyretics is based on intervention 
timing. What is Known: • Reviews of prophylactic drug management among febrile 
seizure children found that antipyretics had no significant benefits. • Recent 
data suggest that antipyretics are effective in preventing febrile seizures. 
What is New: • Weak evidence suggests a possible role in preventing febrile 
seizure recurrence within the same fever episode. • There is clearly no role for 
antipyretic prophylaxis in preventing febrile seizures during distant fever 
episodes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-020-03845-8
PMID: 33125519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Pediatrics. 2011 Feb;127(2):389-94. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-3318.

Neurodiagnostic evaluation of the child with a simple febrile seizure.

Subcommittee on Febrile Seizures; American Academy of Pediatrics.

Collaborators: Duffner PK, Berman PH, Baumann RJ, Fisher PG, Green JL, Schneider 
S, Davidson C.

OBJECTIVE: To formulate evidence-based recommendations for health care 
professionals about the diagnosis and evaluation of a simple febrile seizure in 
infants and young children 6 through 60 months of age and to revise the practice 
guideline published by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) in 1996.
METHODS: This review included search and analysis of the medical literature 
published since the last version of the guideline. Physicians with expertise and 
experience in the fields of neurology and epilepsy, pediatrics, epidemiology, 
and research methodologies constituted a subcommittee of the AAP Steering 
Committee on Quality Improvement and Management. The steering committee and 
other groups within the AAP and organizations outside the AAP reviewed the 
guideline. The subcommittee member who reviewed the literature for the 1996 AAP 
practice guidelines searched for articles published since the last guideline 
through 2009, supplemented by articles submitted by other committee members. 
Results from the literature search were provided to the subcommittee members for 
review. Interventions of direct interest included lumbar puncture, 
electroencephalography, blood studies, and neuroimaging. Multiple issues were 
raised and discussed iteratively until consensus was reached about 
recommendations. The strength of evidence supporting each recommendation and the 
strength of the recommendation were assessed by the committee member most 
experienced in informatics and epidemiology and graded according to AAP policy.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians evaluating infants or young children after a simple 
febrile seizure should direct their attention toward identifying the cause of 
the child's fever. Meningitis should be considered in the differential diagnosis 
for any febrile child, and lumbar puncture should be performed if there are 
clinical signs or symptoms of concern. For any infant between 6 and 12 months of 
age who presents with a seizure and fever, a lumbar puncture is an option when 
the child is considered deficient in Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) or 
Streptococcus pneumoniae immunizations (ie, has not received scheduled 
immunizations as recommended), or when immunization status cannot be determined, 
because of an increased risk of bacterial meningitis. A lumbar puncture is an 
option for children who are pretreated with antibiotics. In general, a simple 
febrile seizure does not usually require further evaluation, specifically 
electroencephalography, blood studies, or neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2010-3318
PMID: 21285335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am Fam Physician. 2019 Apr 1;99(7):445-450.

Febrile Seizures: Risks, Evaluation, and Prognosis.

Smith DK(1), Sadler KP(2), Benedum M(3).

Author information:
(1)Naval Hospital Yokosuka, Branch Health Clinic Diego Garcia, Diego Garcia, 
British Indian Ocean Territory.
(2)Naval Hospital Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)University of South Carolina Greenville School of Medicine, Greenville, SC, 
USA.

A febrile seizure is a seizure occurring in a child six months to five years of 
age that is accompanied by a fever (100.4°F or greater) without central nervous 
system infection. Febrile seizures are classified as simple or complex. A 
complex seizure lasts 15 minutes or more, is associated with focal neurologic 
findings, or recurs within 24 hours. The cause of febrile seizures is likely 
multifactorial. Viral illnesses, certain vaccinations, and genetic 
predisposition are common risk factors that may affect a vulnerable, developing 
nervous system under the stress of a fever. Children who have a simple febrile 
seizure and are well-appearing do not require routine diagnostic testing 
(laboratory tests, neuroimaging, or electroencephalography), except as indicated 
to discern the cause of the fever. For children with complex seizures, the 
neurologic examination should guide further evaluation. For seizures lasting 
more than five minutes, a benzodiazepine should be administered. Febrile 
seizures are not associated with increased long-term mortality or negative 
effects on future academic progress, intellect, or behavior. Children with 
febrile seizures are more likely to have recurrent febrile seizures. However, 
given the benign nature of febrile seizures, the routine use of antiepileptics 
is not indicated because of adverse effects of these medications. The use of 
antipyretics does not decrease the risk of febrile seizures, although rectal 
acetaminophen reduced the risk of short-term recurrence following a febrile 
seizure. Parents should be educated on the excellent prognosis of children with 
febrile seizures and provided with practical guidance on home management of 
seizures.

PMID: 30932454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Ital J Pediatr. 2024 May 12;50(1):95. doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01666-1.

Best practices for the management of febrile seizures in children.

Ferretti A(1), Riva A(2)(3), Fabrizio A(4), Bruni O(5), Capovilla G(6)(7), 
Foiadelli T(8), Orsini A(9), Raucci U(10), Romeo A(11), Striano P(2)(3), Parisi 
P(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Unit, Neurosciences, Mental Health and Sensory Organ (NESMOS) 
Department, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, S. Andrea Hospital, Sapienza 
University, via di Grottarossa 1035/1039, Rome, 00189, Italy. 
alessandro.ferretti@uniroma1.it.
(2)IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, 
Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Pediatrics Unit, Neurosciences, Mental Health and Sensory Organ (NESMOS) 
Department, Faculty of Medicine and Psychology, S. Andrea Hospital, Sapienza 
University, via di Grottarossa 1035/1039, Rome, 00189, Italy.
(5)Department of Social and Developmental Psychology, S. Andrea Hospital, 
Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
(6)Child Neuropsychiatry Department, Epilepsy Center, Mantova, Italy.
(7)C. Poma HospitalFondazione Poliambulanza, Brescia, Italy.
(8)Pediatric Clinic, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Neurology, Pediatric University Department, Azienda Ospedaliera 
Universitaria Pisana, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(10)General and Emergency Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(11)Fatebenefratelli Hospital, ASST Fatebenefratelli-Sacco, Milan, Italy.

Febrile seizures (FS) are commonly perceived by healthcare professionals as a 
self-limited condition with a generally 'benign' nature. Nonetheless, they 
frequently lead to pediatric consultations, and their management can vary 
depending on the clinical context. For parents and caregivers, witnessing a 
seizure can be a distressing experience, significantly impacting their quality 
of life. In this review, we offer an in-depth exploration of FS management, 
therapeutic interventions, and prognostic factors, with the aim of providing 
support for physicians and enhancing communication with families. We conducted a 
comprehensive literature search using the PubMed and Web of Science databases, 
spanning the past 50 years. The search terms utilized included "febrile 
seizure," "complex febrile seizure," "simple febrile seizure," in conjunction 
with "children" or "infant." Only studies published in English or those 
presenting evidence-based data were included in our assessment. Additionally, we 
conducted a cross-reference search to identify any additional relevant data 
sources. Our thorough literature search resulted in a compilation of references, 
with carefully selected papers thoughtfully integrated into this review.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-024-01666-1
PMCID: PMC11089695
PMID: 38735928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


5. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2020 Nov;62(11):1245-1249. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.14642. Epub
 2020 Aug 3.

Current understanding of febrile seizures and their long-term outcomes.

Mewasingh LD(1), Chin RFM(2)(3), Scott RC(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(2)Muir Maxwell Epilepsy Centre, Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences and MRC 
Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)The Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, 
USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK.

In this paper we reframe febrile seizures, which are viewed as a symptom of an 
underlying brain disorder. The general observation is that a small cohort of 
children will develop febrile seizures (2-5% in the West), while the greater 
majority will not. This suggests that the brain that generates a seizure, in an 
often-mild febrile context, differs in some ways from the brain that does not. 
While the underlying brain disorder appears to have no significant adverse 
implication in the majority of children with febrile seizures, serious long-term 
outcomes (cognitive and neuropsychiatric) have been recently reported, including 
sudden death. These adverse events likely reflect the underlying intrinsic brain 
pathology, as yet undefined, of which febrile seizures are purely a 
manifestation and not the primary cause. A complex interaction between 
brain-genetics-epigenetics-early environment is likely at play. In view of this 
emerging data, it is time to review whether febrile seizures are a single 
entity, with a new and multidimensional approach needed to help with predicting 
outcome. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: A febrile seizure is due to a brain's aberrant 
response to high temperature. Problems in a small group of children are now 
being identified later in life. There is no clear correlation between duration 
or other characteristics of febrile seizures and subsequent mesial temporal 
sclerosis.

© 2020 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.14642
PMID: 32748466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]