=== PubMed: gut hastalığı ===
1. Tuberk Toraks. 2006;54(3):292-8.

[Inflammatory bowel disease and lung].

[Article in Turkish]

Ceyhan B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Disease, Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University, 
Istanbul, Turkey. berrin.ceyhan@superonline.com

Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease are associated with a variety of systemic 
manifestations. Pulmonary disease has been described much less frequently than 
other organ systems, yet more than 400 cases have been reported. Lung and 
gastrointestinal system are originated from primitive gut and they have same 
pathogenetic changes in these patients. Major patterns of pulmonary disease 
associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are pleuritis, airway disease, 
interstitial lung disease, necrobiotic nodules, pulmonary eosinophilia, 
thromboembolic disease, vasculitis, granulomatous lung disease, etc. Colectomy 
may aggravate respiratory symptoms. Drug induced disease must be kept in mind in 
patients taking sulfasalazine, mesalamine, methotrexate, and anti-TNF-alpha. 
Latent pulmonary abnormalities are evident either at pulmonary function tests or 
induced sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage, have been also reported in patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease in the absence of clinical evidence of airway 
disease. The treatment of IBD related respiratory involvement depends on the 
specific pattern of involvement, if left untreated, especially in airway 
disease, puts the patient at risk of developing irreversible destruction of the 
air passage. A high degree of suspicion is necessary to detect early the 
respiratory disease in association with any form of bowel disease.

PMID: 17001550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2024 Jan;58(1):13-28. doi: 10.5578/mb.20249951.

[Investigation of the Relationship Between Akkermansia Genomic Diversity in Gut 
Microbiota and Parkinson's Disease Dementia].

[Article in Turkish]

Arıkan M(1), Kahraman Demir T(2), Yıldız Z(3), Helvacı Yılmaz N(4), Şen A(5), 
Hanoğlu L(6), Yıldırım S(7).

Author information:
(1)İstanbul Medipol University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biology, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(2)Biruni University Vocational School, Department of Electroneurophysiology, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.
(3)Fatih Sultan Mehmet Vakıf University Faculty of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Department of Psychology, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(4)İstanbul Medipol University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.
(5)Bakırkoy Prof. Dr. Mazhar Osman Research and Training Hospital for 
Psychiatric and Neurological Diseases, Clinic of Neurology, İstanbul, Türkiye.m.
(6)İstanbul Medipol Üniversitesi, Sağlık Bilim ve Teknolojileri Araştırma 
Enstitüsü (SABİTA), İstanbul.
(7)İstanbul Medipol University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, İstanbul, Türkiye.

Although it is known that the relative abundance of Akkermansia, a bacterial 
genus commonly associated with health, increases in the gut microbiota of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, the exact reason for this increase remains 
unclear. This study was aimed to identify potential changes in Akkermansia 
within the gut microbiota of PD patients in Türkiye. For this purpose, shotgun 
metagenomics and a novel Akkermansia genus-specific amplicon sequencing 
technique was used to investigate the presence of specific Akkermansia strains 
associated with cognitive impairment (CI) stages in PD and to examine potential 
genes within these strains. In this context, four gut microbiota samples from 
Türkiye -three PD with dementia (PDD) and one healthy control without CI (HC)- 
were analyzed by shotgun metagenomics and metagenome-assembled genomes assigned 
to Akkermansia genus were reconstructed. Then, a custom database was created by 
combining these genomes with the Akkermansia genomes in public databases and 
next generation sequencing (NGS) compatible primers specific to the genus 
Akkermansia were designed using this database. After optimization of 
amplification and library preparation steps for genus-specific next generation 
sequencing, gut microbiota samples from 64 PD patients [32 PDD and 32 PD with 
mild CI (PD-MCI)] and 26 HCs were analyzed by genus-specific amplicon 
sequencing. The results revealed the presence of seven strains assigned to 
Akkermansia muciniphila in gut microbiota samples, two of which showed 
significant distribution differences (p< 0.05) between demented (PDD) and 
non-demented groups (PD-MCI, HC). When gene contents of the detected Akkermansia 
genomes were examined through comparative genomic analysis, the presence of 12 
genes only in Akkermansia genomes specific to non-demented groups were 
predicted. The annotations of these genes showed that they were not reported 
before with unknown functions. In this study, for the first time, gut microbiota 
samples from PD patients in Türkiye were analyzed using shotgun metagenomics, a 
novel genus-specific amplicon sequencing method was developed specifically for 
the analysis of Akkermansia genus, and then Akkermansia strains and genes 
potentially associated with CI stages in PD were identified using this method. 
The results underscore that investigating the species or strain level 
differences could help better understanding of the changes associated with PD in 
the human gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20249951
PMID: 38263937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Turk Tip Cemiy Mecm. 1967 Apr;33(4):185-92.

[On the simultaneous appearance of attacks of gout and coronary failure].

[Article in Turkish]

Sigaher V.

PMID: 6063926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]