=== PubMed: KOAH ===
1. Tuberk Toraks. 2015;63(4):265-77. doi: 10.5578/tt.9885.

[Asthma-COPD overlap syndrome].

[Article in Turkish]

Şen E(1), Oğuzülgen K, Bavbek S, Günen H, Kıyan E, Türktaş H, Yorgancıoğlu A, 
Polatlı M, Yıldız F, Çelik G, Demir T, Gemicioğlu B, Mungan D, Saryal S, Sayıner 
A, Yıldırım N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey. esen@ankara.edu.tr.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are common lung diseases 
characterized by chronic airway inflammation and airway obstruction. Among 
patient with COPD and asthma; there is a group of patients with an overlap 
between clinical, functional characteristics and airway inflammation patterns, 
named "Asthma-COPD Overlap Syndrome" (ACOS). ACOS is a syndrome characterized by 
reversible but persistant airflow limitation (postbronchodilator FEV1/FVC < 70%) 
which has some features of both asthma and COPD. ACOS should be suspected in a 
patient > 40 years, with smoking history, previous asthma diagnosis or history 
of childhood asthma who has persistant airflow limitation and reversible ariway 
obstruction (defined by an increase of > %12 of FEV1 pred or increase of FEV1 > 
200 mL after inhalation of 400 mcg salbutamol or 1000 mcg terbutaline). The 
prevalence for ACOS has been reported 11-55% in different case series to date 
and increases by age and is more frequent in females in different age groups. 
Patients with ACOS are younger than COPD patients and older than asthma 
patients. Frequent and severe exacerbations and related hospitalization and 
emergency room visits are common in ACOS and this causes an impaired quality of 
life. Current recommendations of guidelines for pharmacologic treatment of ACOS 
have been composed of a combination with optimal COPD and asthma treatment. 
Future therapeutic approaches should be based on endotypes. Clinical phenotype 
and underlying endotype driven clinical studies may be the base of ACOS 
guidelines.

DOI: 10.5578/tt.9885
PMID: 26963310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Tuberk Toraks. 2015 Jun;63(2):111-31.

[Acute exacerbation in COPD and asthma].

[Article in Turkish]

Yıldırım N(1), Demir T, Gemicioğlu B, Kıyan E, Oğuzülgen K, Polatlı M, Saryal S, 
Sayıner A, Yorgancıoğlu A, Bavbek S, Çelik GE, Günen H, Mungan D, Şen E, Türktaş 
H, Yıldız F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Cerrahpasa Medicine, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nurhayatyil@hotmail.com.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma are airway diseases with 
acute exacerbations. Natural course of both disease are affected by 
exacerbations. COPD exacerbations may be caused by infections and other causes; 
indoor and outdoor pollution, cardiovascular diseases, asthma-COPD overlap 
syndrome, COPD- obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, pulmonary embolism, 
gastro-oesophageal reflux, anxiety-depression, pulmonary hypertension. Exposure 
to triggering factors, viral infections, treatment insufficiency may cause 
asthma exacerbations. Smoking cessations, prevention of infections, long-acting 
anticholinergics, long-acting 2 agonists, inhaled corticosteroids, 
phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors, mucolytics, prophilactic antibiotics can be 
effective on the prevention of COPD exacerbations. Asthma exacerbations may be 
decreased by the avoidance of allergens, viral infections, occupational 
exposures, airpollution, treatment of comorbid diseases. Effective treatment of 
asthma is required to prevent asthma exacerbations. Inhaled steroids and 
combined treatments are the most effective preventive therapy for exacerbations. 
Patient education and cooperation is an element of the preventive measures for 
asthma attacks. Compliance to therapy, inhalation techniques, written asthma 
plans are required. The essential of COPD and asthma exacerbation treatment is 
bronchodilator therapy. Steroids are also implemented to the therapy, targeting 
the inflammation. Specific treatments of the cause (infection, airpollution, 
pulmonary embolism etc.) should be administered.

PMID: 26167969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Tuberk Toraks. 2019 Jun;67(2):131-135. doi: 10.5578/tt.68257.

An underestimated comorbidity of COPD: Thyroid dysfunction.

[Article in English]

Akpınar EE(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Chest Diseases, Dr. Ridvan Ege Hospital, Ufuk University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) has many systemic effects 
influencing morbidity and mortality of the disease. Thyroid diseases which are 
more common in COPD patients than who do not have COPD are underestimated 
despite important clinical consequences. Similar to general population, thyroid 
dysfunctions are more common in females than males among COPD patients. Both 
hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism may be associated to COPD. As well as 
systemic inflammation hypoxia, age, glucocorticoid use and smoking are some of 
the effective factors on developing thyroid dysfunction in COPD patients. In 
this article thyroid dysfunctions that are underrecognized comorbidities of COPD 
patients, their mechanisms of action and clinical outcomes were reviewed.

DOI: 10.5578/tt.68257
PMID: 31414644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Tuberk Toraks. 2019 Mar;67(1):63-70. doi: 10.5578/tt.68162.

The methods other than spirometry in the early diagnosis of COPD.

[Article in English]

Şerifoğlu İ(1), Ulubay G(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Baskent University, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major cause of mortality and 
morbidity around the world. The diagnosis od COPD is based on the presence of 
clinical symptoms and the fact that the ratio of post-bronhodilator forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second to forced expiratory vital capacity(FEV1/FVC) is 
less than 0.70. Persistent limitation of airflow which is a characteristics of 
COPD is reproducible and most common lung function test that is why it is 
usually measured by spirometry. The small airway diseases and the parenchymal 
destruction play a role in the pathogenesis of COPD at different rates over time 
resulting in chronic airflow limitation. These pathologies are not always 
together at the same time and the contribution of those to the development of 
COPD differ from one individual to another. The pathophysiological involvement 
of small airways in COPD has been confirmed. When the obstruction of the small 
airways occur either by mucus, smooth muscle hypertrophy, inflammatory 
infiltration or air wall thickening; then the consequence is the increased 
resistance and ventilation impairment. The parenchymal destruction can be 
estimated via scanning and at the initial assessment of a COPD patient, it gives 
information about the concomitant pulmonary diseases and/or differential 
diagnosis. There is an increasing interest on symptomatic individuals whose 
whose COPD diagnosis has not been confirmed yet with spirometry but diagnosis is 
based on alternative methods and approaches. Although these methods nowadays are 
commonly used for the clinical research, they will offer an opportunity to the 
clinician to find out the COPD patients at an early stage. Herein we will 
discuss the available methods other than spirometry in the early diagnosis of 
COPD before the overt disease is confirmed.

DOI: 10.5578/tt.68162
PMID: 31130137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Tuberk Toraks. 2016 Sep;64(3):240-245.

[New bronchodilators and combinations in COPD treatment].

[Article in Turkish]

Günay S(1), Sarıaydın M, Yılmaz Demirci N.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Chest Diseases, Afyonkarahisar State Hospital, Afyonkarahisar, 
Turkey. sibelgunay@gmail.com.

Bronchodilator drugs are widely used therapeutic agents for treatment of asthma 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). In order to mantain 
bronchodilation, both sympathetic system (particularly beta-2 receptors) 
activation and parasympathetic system inhibition (antimuscarinic effect) 
mechanisms are utilized. Over 20 years, there were no significant changes in 
bronchodilator therapy in obstructive pulmonary diseases. In recent years, 
however, after the development of new ultra long acting bronchodilator drugs, a 
single dose inhaler treatments per day in the treatment of stable COPD became a 
current issue. In this review, with the guidence of the current literature, the 
effects of new beta-2 agonists and anticholinergic bronchodilators will be 
discussed.

PMID: 28366158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]