=== PubMed: kızamık ===
1. Turk Hij Tecr Biyol Derg (1961). 1967;27(2-3):137-50.

[Field trial of attenuated measles vaccine].

[Article in Turkish]

Ari A.

PMID: 5634331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2024 Oct;58(4):471-479. doi: 10.5578/mb.20249653.

[Measles, Rubella, Mumps and Varicella Seropositivity in Health Technician 
Students: A Seroprevalence Study].

[Article in Turkish]

Açikgöz A(1), Kizildağ S(1), Appak Ö(2), Çimrin D(1), Esen N(2), Sayiner AA(2).

Author information:
(1)Dokuz Eylül University Vocational School of Health Services, Department of 
Medical Services and Techniques, İzmir, Türkiye.
(2)Dokuz Eylül University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, İzmir, Türkiye.

Measles, rubella, mumps and chickenpox infections are among the childhood 
diseases that can be prevented by vaccination. Healthcare workers are at greater 
risk of diseases transmitted through contact with patients' respiratory 
secretions, infected blood and body fluids. Students studying in the field of 
health are at the risk of encountering infectious diseases as much as healthcare 
personnel during their internship and practice experience in healthcare 
institutions during their education. In addition, due to the risk of these 
students becoming a source of contamination to the patients they encounter, it 
is important to know their immunity against infectious diseases, to take 
protective measures before encountering patients and to implement the necessary 
vaccination programs. The aim of this study was to determine the seroprevalence 
of vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles, rubella, mumps and chickenpox 
among health technician students studying at Dokuz Eylül University Vocational 
School of Health Services. The population of this cross-sectional study 
consisted of second-year students at Dokuz Eylül University Vocational School of 
Health Services. Five hundred fifty health technician students participated in 
the research. The data of the study was obtained by survey and serology results. 
The survey included questions regarding the students' sociodemographic 
characteristics (age, gender, place of residence during childhood); information 
about their families (education level of mother and father, economic status of 
the family); presence of a history of measles, rubella, mumps and chickenpox; 
and history of vaccination against measles, rubella, mumps and chickenpox. 
Specific IgG type antibodies to measles, rubella, mumps and varicella viruses 
were determined using ELISA kits. IgG test results of these diseases were 
classified as qualitative (positive or negative). In this study, measles, 
rubella, mumps and chickenpox seropositivity in students was found to be 21.8%, 
89.3%, 64.7%, 92.9%, respectively. Measles seropositivity was higher in students 
aged ≥21 years and with low income levels. Rubella seropositivity was higher in 
students who lived in rural areas and had low income during their childhood. 
Mumps and chickenpox seropositivity was higher in students who reported having 
mumps and chickenpox. Chickenpox seropositivity was higher in students who lived 
in rural areas during their childhood. In conclusion, in this study, we found 
that there was a significant proportion of health students who did not have 
protective levels of measles and mumps antibodies. This was much more evident 
for measles. Considering the higher risk of infection in health technician 
students, these vulnerable students may be recommended to receive the third dose 
of measles-mumps-rubella vaccine, regardless of their vaccination history. 
Additionally, conducting larger-scale studies on students with definitive 
vaccination records may allow obtaining more detailed information about the 
status of protection against these diseases.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.20249653
PMID: 39745218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2012 Oct;46(4):716-8.

[Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis cases diagnosed by increased CSF/serum 
measles antibody indices].

[Article in Turkish]

Samlıoğlu P, Unalp A, Gökçay A, Altuğlu I, Oztürk A, Zeytinoğlu A.

Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) caused by persistent defective 
measles virus strains, is a progressive neurological disorder of children and 
adolescents. The aim of this letter was to share the data from SSPE-suspected 
cases who were definitely diagnosed by the detection of increased antibody index 
in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples. A total of 11 patients (mean 
age: 14.3 years) with suspected SSPE between February 2006 to August 2008, were 
included in the study. Simultaneously obtained serum and CSF samples from 
patients were analyzed in terms of albumin, total IgG and measles-specific IgG 
levels (Measles Virus IgG ELISA for CSF Diagnostics, Euroimmun, Germany). The 
value of CSQrel (relative CSF/serum quotient) ≥ 1.5 was accepted indicative for 
intrathecal measles antibody synthesis. Seven (63.6%) of the 11 patients' 
diagnosis were confirmed with the demonstration of elevated CSF/serum indices 
(CSQrel range: 2.3-36.9; mean: 12.9). Mean age of those seven cases was 12.3 
years (age range: 7-21) and four of them were male. The history of patients with 
high antibody indices indicated that three of four patients who had measles 
infection had not been vaccinated against measles. These three unvaccinated 
patients had measles infection at 3rd, 8th and 30th months of age, respectively, 
and the period of SSPE development were 15, 6 and 4.5 years, respectively. With 
this letter we would like to emphasize once more that effective measles 
vaccination is the only way for the prevention of measles and SSPE and the 
demonstration of increased measles antibody index in simultaneously obtained 
serum and CSF samples is crucial for the diagnosis of SSPE.

PMID: 23188587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Tip Tarihi Arastirmalari. 2000;6:11-85.

[Dermatological diseases and treatment described in the Turkish manuscripts 
(XIV-XVth centuries)].

[Article in Turkish]

Tokac M.

This study deals with skin diseases described in the earliest compiled or 
translated Turkish medical manuscripts of the 14th and 15th centuries in 
Anatolia. The manuscripts studies are: Müntehab-i Sifa, Edviye-i Müfrede, 
Tervihü'l-Ervah, Yadigâr, Cerrahiyyetü'l-Haniyye, Kamilü's-Sinaatü't-Tibbiye 
Tercü-mesi, Kitab-i Müntehab-i fi't-Tibb, Haza'inü's-Sa'adat, Akrabadin 
Tercümesi, Mücerrebname, Müfredât-Ibn-i Baytar Tercümesi, Tuhfe-i Mübarizi, 
Tuhfe-i Muradi. The skin disease know at that time are studied under the 
following topics: Cüderi (Ciçek, Variola, Small-pox); Hasbe (Kizamik, Rubeola, 
Measles); Cüzzam (Lepra, Leprosy, Hansen's disease); Demregü (Temriye, 
Dermatophtosis, Tinea coproris); Behak (There are two types: the white and the 
black; the black is Addison's disease ); Baras (Ala, Vitilio); Nemle (Isirga, 
Makül); Ateş paresi (Nar-i farisi, frunculosis); Cemre (Kara kabarcik, Sirpenşe, 
Karbonkül, Carbuncle); Caversiye (Kabarcik hastaliği, blisters disease); 
Sivilceler (Various types of pimples; Humre: Yilancik, Erizipel, Erysipelas, St. 
Anthony's fire; Başbert: Ciban, Fronkül, Boil, Fruncle; Dümmel: Kan çibani, 
Abse, Abscess); Abile (Kabarcik, Bule); Seretan (Kanser, Cancer); Hanaziz 
(Siraca, Scrofuloderma); Akile (Yinürbaş, Gangren); Kurdeşen (Urtiker, 
Urticeria); Uyuz (Gale, Scabies); Giciyik (Kaşinti, Prutitus); Sa'fe (Konak, 
Seboreik dermatit, Scurf); Kel (Aloposi, Favus); Evram (Sişler, Urlar, Tumours); 
Yara (Karha, Cerahat, Wound). The terminology and symptoms of these diseases are 
studied and tired to find their equivalents of today. The causes and the 
treatment of the skin diseases known then are presented.

PMID: 15049324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Yeni Tip Tarihi Arastirmalari. 2001;7:161-244.

[Dermatological diseases and treatment described in the Turkish manuscripts 
(XIV-XVth centuries) (part II)].

[Article in Turkish]

Tokaç M(1).

Author information:
(1)Istanbul Il Sağlik Müdürlüğü. mtokac@turk.net

This study deals with skin diseases described in the earliest compiled or 
translated Turkish medical manuscripts of the 14th and 15th centuries in 
Anatolia. The manuscripts studied are: Müntehab-i Sifa, Edviye-i Müfrede, 
Tervihü'l-Ervah, Yadigâr, Cerrahiyyetü'l-Haniyye, Kamilü's-Sinaatü't-Tibbiye 
Tercü-mesi, Kitab-i Müntehab-i fi't-Tibb, Haza'inü's-Sa'adat, Akrabadin 
Tercümesi, Mücerrebname, Müfredât-i Ibn-i Baytar Tercümesi, Tuhfe-i Mübarizi and 
Tuhfe-i Muradi. The skin diseases known at that time are studied under the 
following topics: Cüderi (Ciçek, Variola, Small-pox); Hasbe (Kizamik, Rubeola, 
Measles); Cüzzam (Lepra, Leprosy, Hansen's disease); Demregü (Temriye, 
Dermatophtosis, Tinea corporis); Behak (There are two types: the white and the 
black; the black is Addison's disease); Baras (Ala, Vitilio); Nemle (Isirga, 
Makül); Ateş paresi (Nar-i farisi, frunculosis); Cemre (Kara kabarcik, Sirpençe, 
Karbonkül, Carbuncle); Caversiye (Kabarcik hastaliği, blisters disease); 
Sivilceler (Various types of pimples; Humre: Yilancik, Erizipel, Erysipelas, St. 
Anthony's fire; Başbert: Ciban, Fronkül, Boil, Fruncle; Dümmel: Kan çibani, 
Abse, Abscess); Abile (Kabarcik, Bule); Seretan (Kanser, Cancer); Hanazir 
(Siraca, Scrofuloderma); Akile (Yinürbaş, Gangren); Kurdeşen (Urtiker, 
Urticeria); Uyuz (Gale, Scabies); Giciyik (Kaşinti, Pruritus); Sa'fe (Konak, 
Seboreik dermatit, Scurf; Kel (Alopesi, Favus); Evram (Sişler, Urlar, Tumours); 
Yara (Karha, Cerahat, Wound). The terminology and symptoms of these diseases are 
studied and tried to find their equivalents of today. The causes and the 
treatment of the skin diseases known then are presented. The second part of 
Tokaç's article continues to deal with the etiology, symptoms and treatment of 
dermatological diseases.

PMID: 14570017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]