=== PubMed: sodium electrolyte high low causes treatment ===
1. Int Immunopharmacol. 2026 Jul 1;180:116653. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2026.116653.
 Epub 2026 Apr 23.

The water-soluble alkaloid from Sophora moorcroftiana enhances Tregs populations 
and ameliorate ulcerative colitis in mice.

Yang Q(1), Yang N(2), Zhang Y(2), An S(3), Si X(2), Kong W(2), Bao T(2), Zhang 
D(4), Sheng L(5), Ma X(6), Luo Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, China; Xianyang First People's Hospital, 
Xianyang 712000, Shanxi, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou 730000, 
Gansu, China.
(4)Department of Pathogenic Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, China.
(5)Department of Immunology, School of Medicine, Northwest Minzu University, 
Lanzhou 730030, Gansu, China.
(6)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, China. Electronic address: 
malaoshi123hao@163.com.
(7)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, China. Electronic address: luoyp@lzu.edu.cn.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inflammatory disease that damages colonic 
and rectal mucosa, and pharmacotherapy is the primary measure. However, the UC 
drug presents several notable problems, including low therapeutic efficacy, side 
effects, and high cost. Sophora moorcroftiana (S. moorcroftiana) is a plant 
native to the Tibetan Plateau. It is recorded that the aqueous extract of the 
seeds is used for treating digestive tract diseases, and the main alkaloids 
possess anti-inflammatory properties. Therefore, it is suggested that the 
water-soluble alkaloid (E2) from S. moorcroftiana may be a potential therapeutic 
agent against UC. The main alkaloids of the extract (E2, E2-a, and E2-b) were 
detected and identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). UC 
mice were induced with dextran sulfate sodium (DSS), followed by treatment with 
extract from S. moorcroftiana seeds. Disease activity index (DAI) scores and H&E 
staining were used to determine which extract has a therapeutic effect. The 
proportion of Tregs/Th17 cells was detected by flow cytometry, the levels of 
IL-6, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-28B in colon tissue were measured by ELISA, and the 
expression of p-STAT3, p-p65, p-IκBα, and p-p38 was detected with western blot. 
The main alkaloids of the extract were identified; there are 7 distinct 
alkaloids in E2, with E2-a and E2-b each containing 4, and piperine is present 
only in E2. Compared with the DSS group, mice treated with E2-b or E2 exhibited 
less severe damage, based on the milder DAI scores, longer colon length, and 
less pathological injury. In contrast, E2-a failed to alleviate the progression 
of UC. Further research revealed that both E2-b and E2 reduced the population of 
IL-17 A+ cells, while E2 upregulated the population of Tregs. In addition, all 
extracts induced a low level of IL-6, and E2 decreased the level of IL-1β. 
Moreover, the protein expression of p-STAT3 was significantly inhibited by E2. 
In the extracts of S. moorcroftiana seeds, the water-soluble alkaloid (E2) 
exhibits the best therapeutic efficacy in UC mice, suggesting that the compounds 
present in the extract is a potential therapeutic agent in UC.

Copyright © 2026 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.intimp.2026.116653
PMID: 42030889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.


2. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2026 Mar 31;114(5):981-988. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.25-0635.
Print  2026 May 6.

Low Blood Glucose and Its Relation to Electrolyte Derangements and Metabolic 
Acidosis in Critically Ill Children in Malawi.

Kreslins A(1)(2), Ngwalangwa F(3), Langton J(4), Mlia Phiri E(4), King C(1), 
Hildenwall H(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Global Public Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Kamuzu University of Health 
Sciences, Blantyre, Malawi.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital 
and Kamuzu University of Health Sciences, Blantyre, Malawi.
(5)Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Critically ill children with low blood glucose concentrations in low-income 
settings suffer a high risk of mortality independent of other signs of disease 
severity and despite administration of the currently recommended treatment of 
hypoglycemia. This study explores other pathways that may relate to the high 
mortality risk, namely electrolyte derangements, metabolic acidosis, and 
hyperketonemia. Children ages 1 month to 5 years old presenting with one or more 
WHO emergency signs were recruited upon arrival to the Pediatric Accident and 
Emergency Department at Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital in Malawi between 
November 2022 and June 2024. A total of 12 hypoglycemic (blood glucose <2.5 
mmol/L), 36 low glycemic (blood glucose 2.5-4.9 mmol/L), and 201 normoglycemic 
(blood glucose 5.0-10.0 mmol/L) children were enrolled. Low glycemic children 
had increased odds of acidosis (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 5.84, 95% CI: 
1.17-29.2 for moderate acidosis; aOR = 27.1, 95% CI: 6.08-120.9 for severe 
acidosis). Among children with acidosis, there were increased odds of 
hypokalemia (aOR = 24.5, 95% CI: 2.91-205.88), hyponatremia (aOR = 2.58, 95% CI: 
1.33-4.99 for moderate acidosis; aOR = 3.62, 95% CI: 1.71-7.68 for severe 
acidosis), and hypernatremia (aOR = 9.42, 95% CI: 2.50-35.5 for severe 
acidosis). There were no increased odds of potassium or sodium derangements in 
those with low glucose concentrations. Low blood glucose concentrations were 
associated with metabolic acidosis, which in turn, was associated with 
hypokalemia and hyponatremia/hypernatremia. However, there was no direct 
association between low blood glucose and electrolyte derangements.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.25-0635
PMID: 41916267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Nat Med. 2026 Apr;32(4):1454-1478. doi: 10.1038/s41591-026-04250-8. Epub 2026 
Mar 30.

Global, regional and national burden of ischemic heart disease attributable to 
suboptimal diet, 1990-2023: a Global Burden of Disease study.

GBD 2023 IHD & Dietary Risk Factors Collaborators.

Collaborators: Lee S, Lee H, Son Y, Shin JI, Aalruz H, Abate YH, Abbafati C, 
Abbas N, Abbaspour E, Abbastabar H, ElHafeez SA, Abdi P, Abdisa WM, Abdollahi M, 
Abdoun M, Abdulkader RS, Abdullahi A, Abiodun OO, Abiodun O, Aboagye RG, 
Abohashem S, Abreu LG, Abtahi D, Abubakar AK, Abubakar B, Abu-Gharbieh E, 
Abukhadijah HJ, Aburuz S, Abu-Zaid A, Adane MM, Addo IY, Adebayo OM, Adedokun 
KA, Adedoyin RA, Adetunji CO, Adetunji JB, Adeyeoluwa TE, Adhikari K, Adiga U, 
Sakilah Adnani QE, Afolabi AA, Afrooghe A, Afzal MS, Afzal S, Agarwal P, Agide 
FD, Agyemang-Duah W, Ahinkorah BO, Ahmad A, Ahmad D, Ahmad F, Ahmad MM, Ahmad S, 
Ahmadi A, Ahmed A, Ahmed H, Ahmed MB, Ahmed M, Ahmed SA, Ajami M, Aji B, Akkaif 
MA, Amiry AA, Awaidy SA, Qadire MA, Alalwan TA, Al-Aly Z, Alam K, Al-Ashwal FY, 
Albashtawy M, Aldawsari KA, Aldhaleei WA, Algammal AM, Alhalaiqa FN, Ali A, Ali 
A, Ali EA, Ali MD, Ali MU, Ali R, Ali SS, Ali W, Alicandro G, Alif SM, Al-Jabi 
SW, Aljunid SM, Alkhatib A, Al-Marwani S, Alnaeem MM, Alomari MA, Alqahtani SA, 
Alrawashdeh A, Alrousan SM, Alsabri MA, Alseragi WM, Altaany Z, Altaf A, 
Alvis-Guzman N, Alwafi H, Al-Wardat M, Al-Worafi YM, Aly S, Ibrahim Alyahya MS, 
Alzoubi KH, Mohammadi MA, Amani R, Amegah AK, Amin TT, Amu H, Amugsi DA, Amusa 
GA, Ancuceanu R, Anil A, Ansong R, Anvari S, Anwar SL, Anyasodor AE, Arabloo J, 
Aravkin AY, Areda D, Armocida B, Ärnlöv J, Arooj M, Artamonov AA, Ashraf J, 
Ashraf T, Yeboah Asiamah-Asare BK, Askarinejad A, Astell-Burt T, Athari SS, 
Atorkey P, Awoke MA, Awotidebe AW, A Ayana LA, Azhar M, Aziz S, Azizian H, Azzam 
AY, Azzolino D, B G, Babu GR, Bagheri N, Taghanaki PB, Bahreini R, Bai R, Baig 
AA, Baker JL, Bakkannavar SM, Baltatu OC, Bam K, Banach M, Bansal H, Bardhan M, 
Bärnighausen TW, Barqawi HJ, Barua L, Basharat Z, Aliabadi SB, Basri R, Bastan 
MM, Basu S, Batra K, Bayati M, Bayih MT, Behera P, Belayneh AG, Belgaumi UI, 
Bilgin GB, Bell ML, Bello OO, Bensenor IM, Benziger CP, Berezvai Z, Berhie AY, 
Beyene HB, Beyene KA, Bhadoria AS, Bhagavathula AS, Bhala N, Bharadwaj R, 
Bhardwaj P, Bhaskar S, Bhat AN, Bhat V, Bhatti GK, Bhatti JS, Bhatti R, Bilgin 
C, Birhan MM, Biswas B, Bizzozero-Peroni B, Boloor A, Boppana SH, Borhany H, 
Brahmaiah J, Braithwaite D, Brauer M, Brenner H, Britton G, Bugiardini R, Bulamu 
NB, Bulto LN, Burkart K, Bustanji Y, Butt ZA, Calina D, Cámera LA, Campos LA, 
Campos-Nonato I, Capodici A, Carvalho F, Carvalho M, Castañeda-Orjuela CA, 
Catapano AL, Cattafesta M, Cattaruzza MS, Cegolon L, Cembranel F, Cenko E, 
Cernigliaro A, Chakraborty S, Kai Chan JS, Chandika RM, Chandran S, Chaudhary 
AA, Chen H, Chen H, Chen S, Chew NW, Chi G, Chichagi F, Chimoriya R, Ching PR, 
Chirinos-Caceres JL, S Cho WC, Choi DW, Chong B, Chou HI, Choudhari SG, 
Chowdhury EK, Chowdhury R, Chu DT, Chukwu IS, Chung SC, Giuseppe Cicero AF, 
Cioffi I, Criqui MH, Cruz-Martins N, Cui X, da Silva AG, Dababo N, Dadras O, Dai 
X, Dai Z, Damiani G, D'Amico E, Darcho SD, Das S, Dascalu AM, Dash NR, Dassah C, 
Davletov K, Bo' CD, Denova-Gutiérrez E, Dergaa I, Dervišević E, Desale AT, 
Chellaiyan Devanbu VG, Devegowda D, Rahman Dewan SM, Dhama K, Dhimal M, Pumpo 
MD, Dima A, Phuong Do TH, do Prado CB, Doaei S, Doegah PT, Dohare S, Doshi OP, 
Doshi RP, Dowou RK, Dsouza VS, Duncan BB, Duraes AR, Dziedzic AM, E'mar AR, 
Ebrahimi A, Eghbali F, Ejeta D, Ekholuenetale M, El Arab RA, El Bayoumy IF, 
Sayed IE, Eladl MA, Elgendy IY, Elhadi M, El-Huneidi W, El-Metwally AA, 
Elmoselhi AB, Elnaem MH, Elsohaby I, Eltaha C, Emeto TI, Eskandarieh S, Eslami 
M, Espinosa-Montero J, Etaee F, Fadaka AO, Fadhil I, Fagbamigbe AF, Fahim A, 
Fahimi S, Fakhradiyev IR, Falzone L, Faraji SN, Fareed M, Farina J, Farina S, 
Farinha CSES, Mahmoud Faris ME, Farrokhpour H, Fazylov T, Feizkhah A, Fekadu G, 
Feng X, Fernandez-Jimenez R, Ferreira N, Fetensa G, Feyisa BR, Fischer F, 
Folayan MO, Fortuna D, Foschi M, Fotouhi M, Fraij A, G S, Gaal PA, Gadanya MA, 
Gaidhane AM, Gaipov A, Galali Y, Gallus S, Gastélum Espinoza WP, Gautam RK, 
Gebregergis MW, Gebremeskel TG, Getacher L, Getie M, Ghadimi DJ, Ghadirian F, 
Ghaffari K, Ghafourifard M, Ghamari SH, Ghasemi MR, Ghazy RM, Gholamalizadeh M, 
Gholami Z, Ghorbani Z, Vajargah PG, Gil AU, Gill TK, Girmay AA, Glasstetter LM, 
Göbölös L, Golechha M, Goleij P, Goulart AC, Grada A, Grivna M, Grosso G, Grover 
A, Guadie HA, Guan Z, Guarducci G, Mohialdeen Gubari MI, Guha A, Gulati S, 
Gunawardane DA, Gupta B, Gupta R, Gupta S, Gupta VB, Gupta VK, Gupta VK, 
Gutiérrez-Murillo RS, Habteyesus DF, Hadei M, Hadi NR, Hadian Z, Haile D, 
Hamadeh RR, Hamdy NM, Hankey GJ, Hanna F, Haque OI, Harding KL, Hargono A, 
Harlianto NI, Haro JM, Marah Has EM, Hasani H, Hashempour R, Hashempur MH, 
Hasnain MS, Hassan A, Hassan I, Hassan N, Havmoeller RJ, Hay SI, Hayat K, Hbid 
Y, He J, He Q, Hebert JJ, Heidari G, Hemmati M, Herrera-Serna BY, Hiraike Y, 
Hoang M, Holla R, Hossain MB, Hosseini SK, Hosseinzadeh H, Hostiuc M, Hostiuc S, 
Huang J, Hussain J, Huynh HH, Ibrahim R, Ibrahim UI, Ibrayeva A, Ikeda N, 
Ikiroma A, Ilesanmi OS, Ilic IM, Ilic MD, Imam MT, Immurana M, Inok A, 
Iqhrammullah M, Iskandar B, Islam MR, Ismail NE, Iso H, Isola G, Iwagami M, Iyer 
M, J V, Jacob L, Jafarzadeh A, Jahanmehr N, Jahrami H, Jain A, Jairoun AA, 
Jakovljevic M, Jalloh M, Jamil S, Jawaid T, Jayapal SK, Jayaram S, Jayasinghe 
RD, Jebasingh FK, Jeong GH, Jeswani BM, Jha AK, Ji Z, Jokar M, Jonas JB, Joseph 
N, Joshua CE, Jozwiak JJ, Jürisson M, Juweid ME, Jyoti A, Kabir A, Kabir Z, 
Kakkar AK, Kalra S, Kamath A, Kamorudeen RT, Kankam SB, Kanmiki EW, 
Karagiannidis E, Karakasis P, Karimi A, Karimi Y, Karimzadhagh S, Kashoo FZ, 
Kasraei H, Kauppila JH, Kayode GA, Kazemian S, Kedir S, Keflie TS, Kelly JT, 
Kesse-Guyot E, Keykhaei M, Khaing IK, Khajuria H, Khalid N, Khalilian A, 
Khammarnia M, Khan A, Khan F, Khan MN, Khan MJ, Khan MA, Khan MU, Khanal V, 
Khatatbeh MM, Khateri S, Khidri FF, Khosla AA, Khubchandani J, Kifle ZD, Kim K, 
Kim YJ, Kimokoti RW, Kisa A, Kivimäki M, Km S, Kokkorakis M, Kolahi AA, Kompani 
F, Korshunov VA, Korzh O, Kosen S, Kostev K, Krishan K, Krishna V, Defo BK, 
Bicer BK, Kuddus M, Kulimbet M, Kumar A, Kumar N, Kumar S, Kundu S, Kunutsor SK, 
Kurniasari MD, Kusnali A, Kusuma D, Kytö V, Vecchia C, Lahariya C, Ching Lai DT, 
Lallukka T, Lám J, Latief K, Lau J, Lauriola P, Nhat Le MH, Hanh Le NH, Thu Le 
TT, Ledda C, Lee I, Lee PH, Lee SW, Leivaditis V, Li A, Li J, Li MC, Li W, 
Ligade VS, Lim LL, Lim SS, Lin J, Lin RT, Lindholm D, Liu L, Liu X, López-Gil 
JF, Lorkowski S, Lucchetti G, Lugo A, Lv L, Ma ZF, Mabrok M, Mafi A, Maghazachi 
AA, Mahalleh M, Mahmoudi E, Majeed A, Makram AM, Rad EM, Malekzadeh R, Malik AA, 
Malta DC, Mamun AA, Manla Y, Mansourian M, Mansournia MA, Maqsood S, Marasini 
BP, Marateb HR, Marghani BH, Marino M, Martinez-Piedra R, Martini D, Martorell 
M, März W, Marzouk S, Masrouri S, Mathur MR, Mathur M, Mathur N, Mattiello R, 
Maugeri A, Mazidi M, McKee M, Meena JK, Meftah E, Mehmood A, Mehra R, Meto TM, 
Melaku YA, Meles HN, Mendez-Lopez MA, Menezes RG, Mentis AA, Meo SA, Mestrovic 
T, Miazgowski T, Michalek IM, Sá ACMGN, Miller TR, Minervini G, Mini GK, 
Mirghafourvand M, Mirrakhimov EM, Mocciaro G, Mogessie Y, Mohamed MG, Mohamed 
NS, Mohammad AM, Mohammadian-Hafshejani A, Mohammadzadeh I, Mohammed S, 
Vardanjani HM, Namin SM, Ghalibaf AM, Moradi Y, Moradi-Lakeh M, Moraga P, 
Morovatdar N, Mossialos E, Motappa R, Mougin V, Khaneghah AM, Mubarik S, Mulita 
A, Munkhsaikhan Y, Murillo-Zamora E, L Murray CJ, Musa S, Mustafa G, Myung W, 
Nafei A, Naik GR, Nainu F, Najdaghi S, Nambi G, Nanavaty DP, Kuni Nandu KT, 
Swamy SN, Nargus S, Nascimento BR, Nascimento GG, Nasrollahizadeh A, 
Nasrollahizadeh A, Nassar M, Natto ZS, Nauman J, Kumari Navaratna SN, Na N, 
Nayak BP, Nazri-Panjaki A, Negahdary M, Negoi I, Negoi RI, Nekouei O, Netsere 
HB, Nguyen D, Nguyen VT, Niazi RK, Nikoobar A, Nikravangolsefid N, Anggraini 
Ningrum DN, Niranjan V, Nomura S, Ahmed Noor ST, Noubiap JJ, Nouri M, Nri-Ezedi 
CA, Ntsekhe M, Nugen F, Nur A, Nurrika D, Nzoputam CI, Nzoputam OJ, Oancea B, 
Odetokun IA, Oguta JO, Ojo-Akosile TR, Okati-Aliabad H, Okeke SR, Okekunle AP, 
Okwute PG, Olagunju AT, Olalusi OV, Oliveira AB, Moraes Oliveira GM, Oludoye OO, 
Omar HA, Bali AO, Ong SK, Ordak M, Orish VN, Ortiz A, Ortiz-Prado E, Osuagwu UL, 
Oumer A, Owolabi MO, A MP, Padron-Monedero A, Padubidri JR, Panda SK, Pande 
Katare D, Pantazopoulos I, Stoian AP, Pardhan S, Parekh U, Parida A, Parija PP, 
Parikh RR, Park EC, Pashaei A, Passera R, Patel J, Patil S, Patoulias D, Pawar 
S, Toroudi HP, Peprah P, Pereira G, Perico N, Perna S, Petermann-Rocha F, Pham 
HN, Pischon T, Plotnikov E, Poddighe D, Poluru R, Avudaiappan AP, Pourghazi F, 
Pradhan J, Singh Pradhan PM, Prasad M, Prashant A, Sady Prates EJ, Purkait T, 
Puvvula J, Qattea I, Qiao Y, Radhakrishnan V, Raghav P, Ur Rahman MH, Rahman MA, 
Rahmanian M, Rahmati M, Rahmawaty S, Rai RK, Raja S, Rajaa S, Rajput P, Ramadan 
MM, Ramasamy C, Ramasamy SK, Ramazanu S, Ramphul K, Rana K, Rana RK, Ranabhat 
CL, Rancic N, Rao M, Rashedi S, Rashid AM, Rashidi MM, Rasouli-Saravani A, 
Rathish D, Rauniyar SK, Rawaf DL, Rawaf S, Razo C, Redwan E, Remuzzi G, Rezaei 
N, Rezaeian M, Rodrigues M, da Silva TPR, Buendia Rodriguez JA, Roever L, 
Rohilla R, Romadlon DS, Khan Rony MK, Root KT, Patrick Ross AG, Roy N, Roy P, 
Roy S, Russo M, Rwegerera GM, A Saad AM, Saber-Ayad MM, Sabet CJ, Sabzmakan L, 
Dhingra MS, Saddik BA, Sadeghi M, Saeb MR, Saeed U, Safi SZ, Sagoe D, 
Sharif-Askari FS, Sharif-Askari NS, Sahebkar A, Sahoo SS, Sajadi SM, Sajid MR, 
Salaroli LB, Saleem S, Saleh MA, Samargandy S, Sami W, Samodra YL, Samy AM, 
Santos IS, Santric-Milicevic MM, Nadeem Saqib MA, Sarkar T, Sarode GS, Sarode 
SC, Sarrafzadegan N, Sarveazad A, Sawhney M, Saxena J, Saya GK, Sayeed A, Sayeed 
MA, Schinckus C, Schmidt MI, Schumacher AE, Schutte AE, Schwendicke F, Selvaraj 
S, Sendekie AK, Senthilkumaran S, Sepanlou SG, Serban D, Sethi Y, Setoguchi S, 
Seylani A, Sha'aban A, Shafie M, Shahab M, Shahabi S, Shahid S, Shahwan MJ, 
Shaikh MA, Shaikh SZ, Sham S, Shamim MA, Shams-Beyranvand M, Shamsutdinova A, 
Shanawaz M, Shao X, Sharfaei S, Sharifan A, Sharma M, Sharma U, Sharma V, 
Shehzadi S, Shenoy RR, Shetty PH, Shetty PK, Shetty SS, Shi W, Shiri R, Shittu 
A, Shiue I, Shokri F, Shool S, Shorofi SA, Shrestha S, Shuval K, Si Y, Siddig 
EE, Siervo M, Sikdar M, Silva LMLR, Singh A, Singh A, Singh B, Singh BP, Singh 
H, Singh JA, Singh K, Singh L, Singh P, Singh P, Singh R, Singh S, Skryabina AA, 
M Soliman SS, Soudah O, Spartalis M, Srichawla BS, Srinivasamurthy SK, Stanaway 
JD, Stubbs P, Subedi N, Subramaniyan V, Suleman M, Sun J, Sundström J, Sunuwar 
DR, Swain CK, Szarpak L, T Y SS, Tabarés-Seisdedos R, Tabatabaei SM, 
Tabatabaeizadeh SA, Tabatabai S, Tabche C, Tabish M, Tadakamadla J, Tadakamadla 
SK, Taiba J, Talaat IM, Tampa M, Tamuzi JL, Tang H, Tat NY, Temsah MH, Teramoto 
M, Thakur R, Thangaraju P, Thangavelu L, Thankappan KR, Thapa R, Thapar R, 
Thayakaran R, Vera Ticoalu JH, Tiwari K, Tomo S, Tonelli M, Touvier M, 
Tovani-Palone MR, Trabelsi K, Tran NM, Huong Tran QT, Tran TH, Minh Duc NT, 
Trico D, Truyen TTTT, Tualeka AR, Tumurkhuu M, Tyrovolas S, Udoakang AJ, Umair 
M, Upadhya D, Upadhyay E, Uppal D, Usman JS, Vaithinathan AG, den Eynde JV, 
Varghese J, Varthya SB, Vasankari TJ, Verma M, Verras GI, Vervoort D, Vinayak M, 
Vu LT, Vujcic IS, Waheed Y, Wang X, Wang X, Wang Y, Wanjau MN, Waqar AB, Wassie 
TH, Werdecker A, Wicaksana AL, Wickramasinghe DP, Wickramasinghe ND, Willeit P, 
Wojewodzic MW, Wonde TE, Wu F, Wu Z, Wubie YM, Xie W, Xu S, Xu X, Yahya G, 
Yamagishi K, Yano Y, Yaribeygi H, Yasufuku Y, Ye P, Yesuf SA, Yin D, Yonemoto N, 
Youssef MY, Yu C, Zanghì A, Zawiah M, M Zeariya MG, Zebari SMMS, P Zhang CJ, 
Zhang L, Zhang Y, Zhang Z, Zhao H, Zhong A, Zhong CC, Zhou S, Zhou XD, Zhu B, 
Zhumagaliuly A, Zielińska M, Zoghi G, Zou Z, Zyoud SH, Mokdad AH, Kim MS, Yon 
DK.

Ischemic heart disease (IHD) remains a leading cause of death worldwide, with 
dietary risks being its most significant modifiable factor. Here, using the 
Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors Study 2023, we estimated 
the mortality and disability-adjusted life years from diet-related IHD across 
204 countries. In 2023, a suboptimal diet was responsible for 4.06 million (95% 
uncertainty interval (UI) 0.74-6.22) IHD deaths and 96.84 million (18.82-142.52) 
IHD disability-adjusted life years. The global age-standardized death rate of 
IHD attributable to suboptimal diet decreased by 43.92% (95% UI 34.44-53.23) per 
100,000 population from 1990 to 2023. Among dietary factors, low intake of nuts 
and seeds (9.87, 95% UI 2.84-17.12 deaths per 100,000 population), low whole 
grains (9.22, 4.73-13.67), low fruits (7.25, 1.54-13.34) and high sodium (7.15, 
0.92-17.97) were primary contributors to IHD deaths. The burden was particularly 
pronounced in low- and middle-sociodemographic index countries. By disentangling 
dietary risk factors, we identified the portion of IHD burden directly 
modifiable through food interventions.

© 2026. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature America, Inc.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-026-04250-8
PMID: 41912805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: S. Afzal reports support 
for the present manuscript from the Institute of Public Health Lahore; grants or 
contracts by the Dean office Institute of Public Health Lahore; honoraria for 
experts, lectures, visiting speakers and educational seminars were provided by 
the Dean Institute of Public Health Lahore; support for attending meetings and 
travel was provided by the Dean Institute of Public Health, Lahore Pakistan; 
participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board as Member 
Pakistan National Bioethics Committee, Member Institutional Review Board of 
Fatima Jinnah Medical University, Member Ethical Review Board and Data 
Monitoring Board Institute of Public Health Lahore Pakistan, and in charge of 
Clinical Research Organization King Edward Medical University; leadership or 
fiduciary roles in board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid 
as a Member Pakistan Higher Education Commission Research Committee, Member 
Pakistan Medical and Dental Commission Research and Journals Committee, Member 
Pakistan Society of Internal Medicine, Member Pakistan Association of Medical 
Editors, Member Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Society, Fellow of 
Leads International, Fellow of Faculty of Public Health UK, Fellow of College of 
Physicians and Surgeons Pakistan; receipt of equipment, materials, drugs and 
services, including computer software and equipment from Bergen University 
Norway for research writing; other financial or nonfinancial interests as the 
Dean of Public Health and Preventive Medicine at King Edward Medical University, 
Lahore; all outside the submitted work. F. Ahmad reports grants or contracts 
(22010901112, 24010901173) from the University of Sharjah outside the submitted 
work. G. Alicandro reports support for the present manuscript from The 
Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, funded 
by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research (MUR): Dipartimenti di 
Eccellenza Program 2023 to 2027. S.M. Alif reports support for attending 
meetings or travel from The University of Melbourne; leadership or fiduciary 
role in other board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid, from 
the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand; all outside the submitted 
work. R. Ancuceanu reports consulting fees from Abbvie and Merck Romania; 
payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript 
writing or educational events from Abbvie, Laropharm, Reckitt and Merck Romania; 
support for attending meetings and/or travel from Merck Romania and Reckitt; all 
outside the submitted work. J. Ärnlöv reports payment or honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from 
AstraZeneca and Boehringer Ingelheim; participation on a Data Safety Monitoring 
Board or Advisory Board with AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Astella; all 
outside the submitted work. T. Astell-Burt reports grants or contracts from 
National Health and Medical Research Council, Australian Research Council and 
Medical Research Future Fund outside the submitted work. J.L. Baker reports 
grants or contracts from Novo Nordisk Foundation, World Cancer Research Fund and 
Independent Research Council Denmark; consulting fees from Novo Nordisk A/S paid 
to her and her institution; support for attending meetings and/or travel from 
the European Association for the Study of Obesity; leadership or fiduciary role 
in other board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid, with the 
European Association for the Study of Obesity as Trustee, president-elect; all 
outside the submitted work. O.C. Baltatu reports support for the present 
manuscript from Alfaisal University, Anima Institute Research Professor 
Fellowship, and the National Council for Scientific and Technological 
Development Fellowship (CNPq, 304224/2022-7); leadership or fiduciary roles in 
other board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with 
VividiWise Analytics as Managing Partner and with São José dos Campos Technology 
Park – CITE as Biotech Advisory Board Member outside the submitted work. M.L. 
Bell reports grants or contracts paid to her institution from US EPA, National 
Institutes of Health (NIH), Hutchinson Postdoctoral Fellowship, Health Effects 
Institute, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and Wellcome Trust Foundation, and 
from the Yale Institute for Biospheric Studies; consulting fees from Clinique 
and ToxiMap; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, 
manuscript writing or educational events Colorado School of Public Health, Duke 
University, Univ. of Texas, Data4Justice, Korea University, UPenn, Brown Univ., 
Northeastern Univ., IOP Publishing, NIH, Health Canada, EHS, PAC-10, UKRI, AXA 
Research Fund Fellowship, University of Texas, Korea University, Harvard 
University, Univ. of Montana and SciQuest; leadership or fiduciary roles in 
other board, society, committee or advocacy groups with Fifth National Climate 
Assessment (unpaid), Lancet Countdown (unpaid), US EPA Clean Air Scientific 
Advisory Committee (honorarium paid to M.L. Bell), Johns Hopkins Department of 
Environmental Health and Engineering Advisory Board (unpaid), Harvard external 
advisory committee for training grant (unpaid), WHO Global Air Pollution and 
Health Technical Advisory group (unpaid), and National Academies Panels and 
Committees (unpaid); all outside the submitted work. C. Benziger reports grants 
or contracts from Patient Centered Outcomes Research Network (STAR CRN Phase 4 
grant) and Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (Improving pediatric 
elevated blood pressure and hypertension recognition in youth); consulting fees 
from Novartis as a consultant for V-1-Prevent and V-inclusion trials; 
participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board with Health 
Partners Institute on the Adherence Wizard Project; all outside the submitted 
work. S. Bhaskar reports grants or contracts from Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS), Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology for Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (KAKENHI) (grant 
ID 23KF0126) and from JSPS and the Australian Academy of Science for JSPS 
International Fellowship (grant ID P23712 ); leadership or fiduciary roles in 
other board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid, with Rotary 
District 9675, Sydney, Australia as District Chair, Diversity, Equity, Inclusion 
& Belonging, with Global Health & Migration Hub Community, Global Health Hub 
Germany, Berlin, Germany as Chair, Founding Member and Manager, with PLoS ONE, 
BMC Neurology, Frontiers in Neurology, Frontiers in Stroke, Frontiers in Public 
Health, Journal of Aging Research, Neurology International, Diagnostics and BMC 
Medical Research Methodology as an Editorial Board Member, with College of 
Reviewers, Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Government of Canada as a 
Member, with World Headache Society, Bengaluru, India as Director of Research, 
with Cariplo Foundation, Milan, Italy as an Expert Adviser/Reviewer, with 
National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Department of Neurology, Division 
of Cerebrovascular Medicine and Neurology, Suita, Osaka, Japan as Visiting 
Director, with Cardiff University Biobank, Cardiff, UK as a Member, Scientific 
Review Committee, with Rotary Reconciliation Action Plan as Chair, and with 
Japan Connect, Osaka, Japan as a Healthcare and Medical Adviser; all outside the 
submitted work. M. Brauer reports support for the present manuscript from The 
Gates Foundation, paid to his institution, and stock or stock options from 
Beyond Meat outside the submitted work. R. Bugiardini reports leadership or 
fiduciary roles in other board, society, committee or advocacy groups, unpaid, 
with The Lancet Regional Health-Europe commission on inequalities and 
disparities in cardiovascular health as Chairperson outside the submitted work. 
K. Burkart reports grants or contracts from The Gates Foundation, NIH and the 
IHME Innovation Fund, all outside the submitted work. M. Carvalho reports other 
financial or nonfinancial interests from LAQV/REQUIMTE, University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal and from FCT/MCTES under the scope of the project 
UIDP/50006/2020 ( https://doi.org/10.54499/UIDP/50006/2020 ), all outside the 
submitted work. A.L. Catapano reports grants or contracts from Chiesi, Amrin, 
and Ultragenyx; consulting fees from Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Esperion, Ionis Pharmaceutical, Medscape, Menarini, MSD, 
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Regeneron, Sanofi, Ultragenyx and Viatris; payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events from Amarin, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Chiesi, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli 
Lilly, Esperion, Ionis Pharmaceutical, Medscape, Menarini, MSD, Novartis, Novo 
Nordisk, Regeneron, Sanofi, Ultragenyx and Viatris; all outside the submitted 
work. E. Cenko reports leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy groups, unpaid, with the ESC Working Group on Coronary 
Pathophysiology and Microcirculation as Chairperson, outside the submitted work. 
H. Chen reports support for attending meetings and/or travel from the 
Alzheimer’s Association outside the submitted work. D.T. Chu reports grants or 
contracts from Vietnam National University Hanoi (VNU), by the Vietnam National 
Foundation for Science and Technology Development; D.T. Chu is/has been 
supported (as a PI unless otherwise indicated) by the VNU for the 2025 research 
activities of the VNU strong research group - the Interdisciplinary Research 
Group on Biomedicine and Health (establishing decision no. 4013/QĐ-ĐHQGHN on 24 
October 2023), by the Vietnam National Foundation for Science and Technology 
Development (grant number 106.02-2019.314), by the VNU under project 
‘Researching on some clinical, non-clinical, and epidemiological 
characteristics, and genetic mutation and expression in Vietnamese patients with 
ovarian cancer’ (decision number 776/QĐ-ĐHQGHN) and other internal research 
grants from VNU International School from 2021 to the present, all outside the 
submitted work. A.F.G. Cicero reports consulting fees from Zentiva, DompéA and 
Viatris; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, 
manuscript writing or educational events from Dompé and Sharper; support for 
attending meetings and/or travel from Amgen Italy; all outside the submitted 
work. X. Dai reports support for the present work from IHME/UW in the form of a 
salary. C.S. Farinha reports consulting fees from Atheneum Partners (Bulgaria, 
Bucharest) since 2019; payment for expert testimony from Atheneum Partners 
(Bulgaria, Bucharest) since 2023; patents planned, issued or pending: 
Sustainable Campus Network (Portugal, Lisbon) since 2019; leadership or 
fiduciary roles in other board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or 
unpaid, with TOPHEALTH – talents and organizations with purpose (Portugal, 
Lisbon) since 2023; all outside the submitted work. X. Feng reports grants or 
contracts from the National Health and Medical Research Council and Medical 
Research Future Fund outside the submitted work. L. Göbölös reports support for 
attending meetings and/or travel from APSC 2025 for hotel and registration 
coverage for faculty member; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, 
society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with Editorial Board 
JAPSC and EBTCS as an examiner; all outside the submitted work. Z. Guan grants 
or contracts with Dementia Centre of Excellence and Curtin enAble Institute, 
Curtin University outside the submitted work. A. Guha reports grants or 
contracts from the American Heart Association and US Department of Defense 
outside the submitted work. A. Hassan reports consulting fees from Novartis, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, Biologix, Merck, Hikma Pharma, Janssen, Inspire Pharma, Future 
Pharma and Elixir Pharma; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, 
speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from Novartis, 
Allergan, Merck, Biologix, Janssen, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, Bayer, Hikma Pharma, 
Al Andalus, Chemipharm, Lundbeck, Inspire Pharma, Future Pharma and Habib 
Scientific Office, and Everpharma; support for attending meetings and/or travel 
from Novartis, Allergan, Merck, Biologix, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, Bayer, Hikma 
Pharma, Chemipharm, Al Andalus and Clavita Pharm; leadership or fiduciary roles 
in other board, society, committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with MENA 
Headache Society as Vice President, Multiple Sclerosis chapter of the Egyptian 
Society of Neurology as Board Member, Headache Chapter of the Egyptian Society 
of Neurology as Board Member, committee of Education of the International 
Headache Society (IHS), membership committee of IHS, and regional committee of 
IHS as Member; all outside the submitted work. J.J. Hebert reports grants or 
contracts from ResearchNB for salary support outside the submitted work. I. Ilic 
reports support for the present manuscript from Ministry of Science, 
Technological Development and Innovation of the Republic of Serbia (no. 
451-03-137/2025-03/200110). M. Ilic reports support for the present manuscript 
from Ministry of Science, Technological Development and Innovation of the 
Republic of Serbia (no. 451-03-47/2023-01/200111). N.E. Ismail reports 
leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, committee or advocacy 
groups, unpaid, with Malaysian Academy of Pharmacy, Malaysia as Bursar and 
Council Member and Malaysian Pharmacists Society Education Chapter Committee as 
Committee Member, all outside the submitted work. J. Jozwiak reports payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events from Novartis, Adamed, Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Servier 
and Novo Nordisk (personal fees), all outside the submitted work. J. 
Khubchandani reports grants or contracts from Merck Pharmaceuticals for Research 
compensation for PI and from National Science Foundation, USA for Research 
expenses covered for PI, all outside the submitted work. M. Kivimäki reports 
grants or contracts from the Wellcome Trust (221854/Z/20/Z), Medical Research 
Council (MR/Y014154/1), National Institute on Aging (R01AG056477 and 
R01AG062553) and Research Council of Finland (350426) as PI of research grants 
to his university, all outside the submitted work. K. Krishan reports other 
nonfinancial support from the University Grants Commission Centre of Advanced 
Study, CAS II, awarded to the Department of Anthropology, Panjab University, 
Chandigarh, India, outside the submitted work. A. Kusnali reports support for 
the present manuscript from National Research and Innovation Agency, Republic of 
Indonesia for access to scientific literature databases containing paid and 
unpaid online journals such as SCOPUS, Web of Science and others. T. Lallukka 
reports support for the present manuscript paid to her institution from the 
Research Council of Finland (330527). I. Lee reports grants or contracts from 
AdelaideMRI, Adelaide, Australia (PhD stipend for a project on AI-based medical 
report generation; payment made to the University of South Australia); outside 
the submitted work. M.-C. Li reports support for the present manuscript via 
grants from the National Science and Technology Council of Taiwan 
(113-2314-B-003-002) and the Higher Education Sprout Project of National Taiwan 
Normal University; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with Journal of the American Heart 
Association as Technical Editor outside the submitted work. D. Lindholm reports 
stock or stock options in AstraZeneca at the time of employment (>2.5 years 
ago); other financial or nonfinancial interests with AstraZeneca as a Former 
employee (>2.5 years ago); all outside the submitted work. S. Lorkowski reports 
grants or contracts paid to his institution from DSM-Firmenich (formerly DSM 
Nutritional Products); consulting fees from Danone, Novartis Pharma, Swedish 
Orphan Biovitrum; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers 
bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from Amarin Germany, Amedes 
Holding, Amgen, Berlin-Chemie, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo 
Deutschland, Danone, Hubert Burda Media Holding, Janssen-Cilag, Lilly 
Deutschland, Novartis Pharma, Novo Nordisk Pharma, Roche Pharma, Sanofi-Aventis, 
Swedish Orphan Biovitrum and SYNLAB Holding Deutschland; support for attending 
meetings and/or travel from Amgen; participation on a Data Safety Monitoring 
Board or Advisory Board with Amgen, Daiichi Sankyo Deutschland, Novartis Pharma 
and Sanofi-Aventis; all outside the submitted work. H.R. Marateb reports grants 
or contracts from LLAVOR 2024 grant from gencia de Gestio d’Ajuts Universitaris 
i de Recerca, Spain (payments made to Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - 
Barcelona Tech) and from Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - Barcelona Tech 
(salary), outside the submitted work. M. McKee reports support for attending 
meetings and/or travel from Population Health Research Institute, McMaster 
University; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, committee or 
advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with Northern Ireland Chest Heart & Stroke as 
chair of scientific advisory board; all outside the submitted work. A.-F. Mentis 
reports grants or contracts from ‘MilkSafe: a novel pipeline to enrich formula 
milk using omics technologies’, research co-financed by the European Regional 
Development Fund of the European Union and Greek national funds through the 
Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the 
call RESEARCH - CREATE - INNOVATE (project code T2EDK-02222), as well as from 
ELIDEK (Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation, MIMS-860) (both outside 
of the present manuscript); payment for expert testimony as external 
peer-reviewer for Fondazione Cariplo, Italy; leadership or fiduciary role in 
other board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid, as as 
Editorial Board Member for ‘Systematic Reviews’ journal, for ‘Annals of 
Epidemiology’ journal, and as Associate Editor for ‘Translational Psychiatry’; 
all outside the submitted work. S.A. Meo reports grants or contracts from 
Researchers Supporting Project, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
(RSP-2025 R47) outside the submitted work. S. Mohammed reports support for the 
present manuscript from the Gates Foundation. S. Nomura reports support for the 
present manuscript from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology of Japan (24H00663) and Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and 
Technology from the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JPMJPR22R8). M. Ntsekhe 
reports grants or contracts from National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and South African Medical 
Research Council; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with South African Heart 
Association, Heart Failure Society of South Africa, and Pan African Society of 
Cardiology; all outside the submitted work. B. Oancea reports support for the 
present manuscript from the Ministry of Research, Innovation and Digitalization 
through the Core Program of the National Research, Development and Innovation 
Plan 2022-2027 (project no. PN 23-02-0101-contract no. 7N/2023). A. Ortiz 
reports grants or contracts from Sanofi paid to their institution The Fundación 
Jiménez Díaz Health Research Institute and as Director of the Catedra 
AstraZeneca-Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM) of Chronic Kidney Disease and 
Electrolytes paid to their institution UAM; consulting fees from Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Bioporto, Boehringer Ingelheim, Fresenius Medical Care, GSK, Bayer, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, Lilly, Chiesi, Otsuka, Novo Nordisk and Sysmex; payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bioporto, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Fresenius Medical Care, GSK, Bayer, Sanofi-Genzyme, Sobi, Menarini, Lilly, 
Chiesi, Otsuka, Novo Nordisk, Sysmex and Vifor Fresenius Medical Care Renal 
Pharma and Spafarma; support for attending meetings and/or travel from Astellas, 
AstraZeneca, Fresenius Medical Care, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bayer, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, Chiesi, Sobi, and Bayer; participation on a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board or Advisory Board with Astellas, AstraZeneca, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Fresenius Medical Care, Bayer, Sanofi-Genzyme, Chiesi, Otsuka, Novo 
Nordisk and Sysmex; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy group, unpaid, with Council ERA and Sociedad Madrileña de 
Nefrología (SOMANE); all outside the submitted work. S.K. Panda reports support 
for the present manuscript from Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University); 
grants or contracts from DST-Govt. of Odisha (letter no. 3444/ST); participation 
on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board with Heliyon as Associate 
Editor; outside the submitted work. A. Pantea Stoian reports consulting fees 
paid to her institution from Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Eli 
Lilly, Servier, Amgen, Roche Diagnostics and Sandoz; payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational 
events paid to her institution from Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Novartis, 
Eli Lilly, Servier, Amgen, Roche Diagnostics, Sandoz, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Medochemie; payment for expert testimony from paid to her institution from Eli 
Lilly and Novo Nordisk; support for attending meetings and/or travel paid to her 
institution from Novo Nordisk, Medochemie and Sanofi; patents planned, issued or 
pending with Novo Nordisk, Novartis, Servier, AstraZeneca and Eli Lilly; 
participation on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board with Novo 
Nordisk, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Eli Lilly, Amgen and Roche Diagnostics; 
leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, committee or advocacy 
groups, unpaid, with Central European Diabetes Association, Association for 
Renal-Metabolic & Nutritional Studies, EASD Global Council, Central European 
Diabetes Association; unpaid medical writing for Novo Nordisk and Sanofi; all 
outside the submitted work. R. Passera reports participation on a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board or Advisory Board, unpaid, as Member of the Data Safety 
Monitoring Board dello studio ‘Consolidation with ADCT-402 (loncastuximab 
tesirine) after immunochemotherapy: a phase II study in BTKi-treated/ineligible 
Relapse/Refractory Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) patients’ - Fondazione Italiana 
Linfomi, Alessandria (Italy); leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, 
society, committee or advocacy groups, unpaid, as Member of the European Society 
for Blood and Marrow Transplantation Statistical Committee, Paris (F) and past 
member 2020–2023 (biostatistician) of the Institutional Review Board/Independent 
Ethics Committee Comitato Etico Azienda Ospedaliero Santi Antonio e Biagio 
Alessandria Azienda Sanitaria Locale di Alessandria e Azienda Sanitaria Locale 
di Vercelli (Italy); all outside the submitted work. S. Saleem reports support 
for the present manuscript from Health Services Academy, Islamabad. Y.L. Samodra 
reports grants or contracts from Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive 
Medicine at National Taiwan University, National Science and Technology Council 
of Taiwan (postdoctoral fellow contract) and School of Public Health, TMU, 
Taiwan (PhD scholarship); leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid, with Benang Merah Research Center 
(benangmerah.net), Indonesia as Co-founder; other financial or nonfinancial 
interests with Jago Beasiswa (idebeasiswa.com), Indonesia as Mentor; all outside 
the submitted work. A.E. Schutte reports consulting fees from Medtronic, 
AstraZeneca, Sky Labs for serving on advisory board; payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or educational 
events from Omron, Servier, Medtronic, AstraZeneca and Sky Labs; support for 
attending meetings and/or travel from Servier, Medtronic and AstraZeneca; all 
outside the submitted work. S. Setoguchi reports grants or contracts paid to 
their institution from National Institute of Health, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, 
Pfizer Japan, Daiichi Sankyo and Bristol Myers Squib; consulting fees from 
Regeneron, Pfizer Japan, BMS and Merck for postmarket safety studies and their 
methodologies; all outside the submitted work. V. Sharma reports other financial 
or nonfinancial support from Directorate of Forensic Science, Ministry of Home 
Affairs’s research project (DFSS28(1)2019/EMR/6) at Institute of Forensic 
Science & Criminology, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India, outside the 
submitted work. J.I. Shin reports support for the present manuscript from the 
Yonsei Fellowship, funded by Lee Youn Jae. L.M.L.R. Silva reports grants or 
contracts from the Sport Physical Activity and Health Research & Innovation 
Center, Portugal, all outside the submitted work. J.A. Singh reports consulting 
fees from ROMTech, Atheneum, Clearview Healthcare Partners, American College of 
Rheumatology, Yale, Hulio, Horizon Pharmaceuticals, DINORA, ANI/Exeltis, USA, 
Frictionless Solutions, Schipher, Crealta/Horizon, Medisys, Fidia, PK Med, Two 
Labs, Adept Field Solutions, Clinical Care options, Putnam Associates, Focus 
Forward, Navigant consulting, Spherix, MedIQ, Jupiter Life Science, UBM, Trio 
Health, Medscape, WebMD and Practice Point Communications and the NIH; payment 
or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing 
or educational events from Simply Speaking; support for attending meetings 
and/or travel from Simply Speaking; participation on a Data Safety Monitoring 
Board or Advisory Board with FDA Arthritis Advisory Committee as a member, no 
financial support; leadership or fiduciary roles in other board, society, 
committee or advocacy groups, paid or unpaid as a past steering committee member 
of OMERACT, an international organization that develops measures for clinical 
trials and receives arm’s length funding from 12 pharmaceutical companies, and 
as a Chair of the Veterans Affairs Rheumatology Field Advisory Committee, and as 
editor and the Director of the University of Alabama at Birmingham Cochrane 
Musculoskeletal Group Satellite Center on Network Meta-analysis; stock or stock 
options in Atai Life Sciences, Kintara Therapeutics, Intelligent Biosolutions, 
Acumen Pharmaceutical, TPT Global Tech, Vaxart Pharmaceuticals, Atyu Biopharma, 
Adaptimmune Therapeutics, GeoVax Labs, Pieris Pharmaceuticals, Enzolytics, Seres 
Therapeutics, Tonix Pharmaceuticals Holding Corp., Aebona Pharmaceuticals, and 
Charlotte’s Web Holdings and previously owned stock options in Amarin, Viking 
and Moderna Pharmaceuticals; all outside the submitted work. J.D. Stanaway 
reports support for the present manuscript from the Gates Foundation paid to his 
institution; grants or contracts from Novo Nordisk paid to his institution 
outside the submitted work. J. Sundström reports stock or stock options in 
companies (Anagram Kommunikation, Sence Research, Symptoms Europe and 
MinForskning) providing services to companies and authorities in the health 
sector including Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer, Eli Lilly, Gilead, GSK, 
Göteborg University, Itrim, Ipsen, Janssen, Karolinska Institutet, LIF, 
Linköping University, Novo Nordisk, Parexel, Pfizer, Region Stockholm, Region 
Uppsala, Sanofi, STRAMA, Takeda, TLV, Uppsala University, Vifor Pharma and 
WeMind; all outside the submitted work. R. Tabarés-Seisdedos reports grants or 
contracts from Valencian Regional Government’s Ministry of Education 
(PROMETEO/CIPROM/2022/58), the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and 
Universities (PID2021-129099OB-I00) and Valencian Regional Government’s Ministry 
of Education (PROMETEO/CIPROM/2022/58), outside the submitted work. The funders 
were not involved in the design of the manuscript or decision to submit the 
manuscript for publication, nor will they be involved in any aspect of the 
study’s conduct. J.H.V. Ticoalu reports leadership or fiduciary role in other 
board, society, committee or advocacy group, paid or unpaid, with Benang Merah 
Research Center (benangmerah.net), Indonesia as Co-founder, outside the 
submitted work. M. Touvier reports grants or contracts paid to their institution 
from European Research Council, French National Research Agency, National Cancer 
Institute, Bettencourt Foundation and World Cancer Research Fund; payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing or 
educational events from Collège de France, Chair of Professor in Public Health; 
all outside the submitted work. E. Upadhyay reports the following published 
patents: ‘A system and method of reusable filters for anti-pollution mask’, ‘A 
system and method for electricity generation through crop stubble by using 
microbial fuel cells’, ‘A system for disposed personal protection equipment 
(PPE) into biofuel through pyrolysis and method’, ‘A novel herbal pharmaceutical 
aid for formulation of gel and method thereof’ and ‘Herbal drug formulation for 
treating lung tissue degenerated by particulate matter exposure’, and the 
following filed patents: ‘A method to transform cow dung into the wall paint by 
using natural materials and composition thereof’, ‘Biodegradable packaging 
composition and method of preparation thereof’, ‘Eco-friendly bio-shoe polish 
from banana and turmeric’, ‘Honey-based polyherbal syrup composition to treat 
air pollution-induced inflammation and preparation method thereof’ and ‘Process 
for preparing a caffeine free, antioxidant and nutrient-rich beverage’; 
leadership or fiduciary role in other board, society, committee or advocacy 
group, paid or unpaid, as Executive Council Member of the Indian Meteorological 
Society, Jaipur Chapter (India) and as Member Secretary of the DSTPURSE Program; 
all outside the submitted work. P. Willeit reports consulting fees from Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. Y. Yasufuku reports grants or 
contracts from Shionogi & Co. whose employment expenses are paid from the joint 
research fund provided by this pharmaceutical company to The University of Osaka 
(formerly Osaka University), outside the submitted work. M. Zielińska reports 
other financial or nonfinancial support as an Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease 
employee. The other authors declare no competing interests.