=== PubMed: PSA prostate high causes treatment ===
1. Lancet Oncol. 2026 May;27(5):625-636. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(26)00066-5.

On-treatment serum prostate-specific antigen and overall survival in prostate 
cancer (STAMPEDE platform protocol): a post-hoc analysis of data from five phase 
3 trials.

Kayani M(1), Murphy L(2), Dutey-Magni P(2), Howlett S(3), Sachdeva A(4), 
Padden-Modi M(5), Abdel-Aty H(6), Brown LC(2), Amos CL(2), Chan K(2), Gilbert 
DC(2), Langley RE(2), Brown M(7), Sydes MR(2), Parker CC(5); STAMPEDE 
Collaborators; Cross W(8), Malik Z(9), Varughese M(10), Turco F(11), Millman 
R(2), Matheson D(2), Gillessen S(11), Clarke NW(12), Parmar MKB(2), James ND(5), 
Attard G(13).

Collaborators: Jones E, Hyde K, Glen H, Needleman S, McGovern U, Sheehan D, 
Paisey S, Shaffer R, Beresford M, Malik Z, Zarkar A, Porfiri E, Fackrell D, Lee 
L, Sreenivasan T, Brock S, Brown S, Bahl A, Smith-Howell M, Woodward C, Phan MD, 
Mazhar D, Narahari K, Tanguay J, Douglas F, Kumar A, Hamid A, Ibrahim A, 
Muthukumar D, Simms M, Worlding J, Tran A, Kagzi M, Das P, Pezaro C, Sivoglo V, 
Masters B, Keng-Koh P, Manetta C, McLaren D, Gupta N, Sheehan D, Boussios S, 
Taylor H, Graham J, Perna C, Melcher L, Grant W, Hyde K, Sabharwal A, Hofmann U, 
Dealey R, McPhail N, Brierly R, Brown S, Capaldi L, Sidek N, Whelan P, 
Sreenivasan T, Robson P, Falconer A, Rudman S, Vivekanandan S, Mullessey V, 
Needleman S, Vilarino-Varela M, Khoo V, Tipples K, Afshar M, Falconer A, 
Brulinski P, Sangar V, Peedell C, Azzabi A, Hoskin P, Mullassery V, Sundar S, 
Khan Y, Conroy R, Protheroe A, Carser J, Rogers P, Capaldi L, Tarver K, Gibbs S, 
Khan MM, Hingorani M, Azzabi A, Crabb S, Alameddine M, Bhalla N, Manetta C, 
Hughes R, Logue J, Leaning D, Vengalil S, Azzabi A, Ford D, Walker G, Shaheen A, 
Khan O, Chan A, Ahmed I, Hilman S, Douglas F, Kumar A, Tran A, Paisey S, Sayers 
I, Capaldi L, Nikapota A, Bloomfield D, Porter T, Joseph J, Rentsch C, Pereira 
Mestre R, Roggero E, Beyer J, Borner M, Strebel R, Berthold D, Engeler D, John 
H, Popescu R, Durr D.

Author information:
(1)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; MRC Clinical 
Trials Unit at UCL, Institute of Clinical Trials and Methodology, University 
College London, London, UK; Department of Oncology, University College London 
Hospitals, London, UK.
(2)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, Institute of Clinical Trials and 
Methodology, University College London, London, UK.
(3)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; Department of 
Oncology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK.
(4)Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 
Department of Surgery, Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(5)Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and The Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, UK.
(6)MRC Clinical Trials Unit at UCL, Institute of Clinical Trials and 
Methodology, University College London, London, UK; Royal Marsden NHS Foundation 
Trust and The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK.
(7)Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(8)St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(9)Clatterbridge Cancer Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Wirral, UK.
(10)Royal Devon University Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust and University of 
Exeter, UK.
(11)Institute of Oncology of Southern Switzerland, Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale, 
Bellinzona, Switzerland and Faculty of Biosciences, University of Southern 
Switzerland, Lugano, Switzerland.
(12)Division of Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 
Department of Surgery, Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK; Department 
of Urology, Salford Royal Hospital, Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, 
Manchester, UK.
(13)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; Department of 
Oncology, University College London Hospitals, London, UK. Electronic address: 
g.attard@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentrations decrease after 
hormone therapy for prostate cancer, with the nadir serving as a potentially 
useful prognostic biomarker. To support clinical use, we evaluated the 
association between PSA nadir values and survival outcomes, stratified by 
pre-treatment metastatic volume or, in patients with non-metastatic cancer, 
stratified by lymph node status.
METHODS: As part of the STAMPEDE platform trial, patients with metastatic or 
very high-risk non-metastatic prostate adenocarcinoma were recruited to five 
randomised, controlled, phase 3 trials conducted at 126 hospitals or oncology 
centres in Switzerland and the UK. Patients were randomly assigned to either 
standard of care (androgren deprivation therapy [ADT] alone or ADT plus 
docetaxel) or to one of five experimental treatment groups: ADT plus docetaxel 
with or without zoledronic acid, ADT plus abiraterone acetate with or without 
enzalutamide, or ADT plus prostate radiotherapy (only patients with metastatic 
disease). We used trial data from these participants to perform landmark 
analyses to test associations of PSA at 6, 12, and 24 weeks after randomisation 
with overall survival. Only patients with a PSA value were included in each 
landmark analysis. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate 96-month overall 
survival rates and the corresponding 95% CIs for patients categorised by either 
metastatic volume or lymph node status. The STAMPEDE protocol platform is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT00268476), EUDRACT (2004-000193-31), and 
ISRCTN (ISRCTN78818544).
FINDINGS: This study included 7129 patients from the STAMPEDE platform, who were 
recruited between Oct 5, 2005, and Sept 2, 2016; 4438 had metastases and 2691 
had very high-risk non-metastatic disease. Among patients with metastasis and 
volumetric assessment, 2211 (55·9%) of 3956 had high-volume metastases, and 
among those with non-metastatic disease, 1033 (38·4%) were lymph node positive. 
A PSA concentration of 0·2 ng/mL or less was less frequent at 6 weeks or 12 
weeks, but was associated with equivalent survival rates, compared with a PSA of 
0·2 ng/mL or less at 24 weeks. Survival rates of PSA subcategories (≤0·2 ng/mL, 
>0·2 to 1·0 ng/mL, >1·0 to 3·0 ng/mL, and >3·0 ng/mL) differed by metastatic 
volume or, in patients with non-metastatic disease, by nodal status. Survival 
was longest for patients allocated to abiraterone with or without enzalutamide. 
Among patients with metastatic disease in the abiraterone with or without 
enzalutamide group who had a PSA of 0·2 ng/mL or less at 24 weeks, 96-month 
overall survival in patients with low-volume metastatic disease (64·1% [95% CI 
57·8-69·8]) was higher than in patients with high-volume metastatic disease 
(44·6% [37·1-51·9]), but lower than in patients with non-metastatic, 
node-positive disease (79·4% [73·8-83·9]). 96-month overall survival was highest 
for patients with non-metastatic, node-negative disease (82·8% [95% CI 
78·7-86·1]).
INTERPRETATION: Metastatic volume or nodal status influence survival rates 
associated with on-treatment serum PSA categories, including for undetectable 
PSA. Radiological features and serum PSA could be combined to better predict 
survival. PSA at 24 weeks showed strongest associations with overall survival, 
although a PSA concentration of 0·2 ng/mL or less at any timepoint predicted 
favourable outcome. These findings could inform prognosis and warrant evaluation 
for treatment selection in clinical trials.
FUNDING: Cancer Research UK, Prostate Cancer UK, UK Medical Research Council, 
and John Black Charitable Foundation.

Copyright © 2026 Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This 
is an Open Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier 
Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(26)00066-5
PMID: 42061373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests LM reports support for 
the present manuscript from Cancer Research UK and research funding to her 
institution for the STAMPEDE trial from Janssen, Astellas, Novartis, Sanofi, and 
Clovis. AS reports grants or contracts from Cancer Research UK, The Urology 
Foundation, the Prostate Cancer Foundation, the Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council, and Prostate Cancer UK; consulting fees from Veracyte 
and Novartis; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers 
bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from Ipsen and Gedeon 
Richter; support for attending meetings or travel from Janssen; participation on 
a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for Act-ResoLUTE, Veracyte, and 
Janssen; and a leadership role as an associate member of the European 
Association of Urology Prostate Cancer Guidelines Panel. REL reports support for 
the present manuscript from UK Research and Innovation–Medical Research Council 
core funding. MRS reports support for the present manuscript from UK Research 
and Innovation–Medical Research Council through part of his employment in a 
previous role; grants or contracts from Astellas, Janssen, and Sanofi-Aventis to 
his previous institution for research elsewhere within the STAMPEDE research 
platform; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, 
manuscript writing, or educational events from Eisai, Eli Lilly, and Janssen; 
support for attending meetings or travel from the Health Research Board 
(Ireland), the Trials Research Methodology Network (Ireland), and the National 
Cancer Grid (India); and participation on independent data monitoring committees 
for academic sponsors, none of which are paid. CCP reports participation on an 
advisory board for Janssen (payment to institution); consultancy for Novartis 
(payment to institution); and participation on an independent data monitoring 
committee for Telix Pharmaceuticals. WC reports payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational 
events from Bayer, Johnson & Johnson, and Ipsen; support for attending meetings 
or travel from Bayer, Johnson & Johnson, and Ipsen; and a leadership role as a 
clinical adviser for the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
clinical adviser. MV reports payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, 
speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from Astellas, and 
support for attending meetings or travel from Astellas. FT reports payment or 
honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or 
educational events from Silvio Grasso Consulting, the Swiss Group for Clinical 
Cancer Research, Merck, and Novartis (payment to institution), and from Bayer 
and MSD (personal); support for attending meetings or travel from Bayer; and 
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board for Bayer and 
Telix Pharmaceuticals. SG reports consulting fees from Ipsen and Avalere Health; 
payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript 
writing, or educational events from Silvio Grasso Consulting, Peer Voice, the 
European Society for Medical Oncology, Meister ConCept, the Swiss Group for 
Clinical Cancer Research, American Society of Clinical Oncology Genitourinary, 
AdMeTech Foundation, EPG Health, Intellisphere, Orikata, Medtoday Switzerland, 
UroPratica Group in São Paulo, Swiss Infomed Organisation, Swiss Cancer 
Institute, Emirates Oncology, Symposia Congressi, and ideA-Z Project in 
progress; support for attending meetings or travel from Bayer, Intellisphere, 
Gilead, and Johnson & Johnson; patents planned, issued, or pending for prostate 
cancer biomarkers (WO2009138392); participation on data safety monitoring boards 
or advisory boards for MSD, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Innomedica, Macrogenics, Astellas, Novartis, Amgen, Merck, 
and GSK; leadership or fiduciary roles in other boards, societies, committees, 
or advocacy groups for Pfizer, the ALPINE Prostate Cancer Committee, LinkinVax, 
and the University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (Manno, 
Switzerland); and other financial or non-financial interests from ASCO, 
Unicancer, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and Bayer. NWC reports support for the present 
manuscript through STAMPEDE trial funding; payment or honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from 
Bayer, AstraZeneca, Janssen, and Astellas; participation on a data safety 
monitoring board or advisory board for the CAPItello-281 trial; and a leadership 
role as Clinical Lead of the National Prostate Cancer Audit for England and 
Wales. MKBP reports support for the present manuscript from the UK Medical 
Research Council through core funding to the Clinical Trials Unit. NDJ reports 
support for the present manuscript from Cancer Research UK and the UK Medical 
Research Council; study funding and provision of study drug from Sanofi, 
Astellas, and Janssen; grants or contracts from the Prostate Cancer Foundation; 
consulting fees from Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca; payment or honoraria for 
lectures, presentations, speakers bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational 
events from Astellas; patents planned, issued, or pending related to an AI 
pathology tool licensed to ArteraAI; and participation on a data safety 
monitoring board as a member of the VISION trial. GA reports grants or contracts 
from Janssen, Astellas Pharma, Novartis, and Agilent; royalties or licenses 
through the Institute of Cancer Research Rewards to Discoverers Scheme; support 
for attending meetings or travel and personal fees from Janssen, Astellas 
Pharma, Pfizer, Ipsen, Novartis/AAA, Abbott Laboratories, Ferring, ESSA 
Pharmaceuticals, Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, Beigene, Blue Earth 
Therapeutics, Takeda, Veracyte, AstraZeneca, and Sanofi-Aventis; and patents 
planned, issued, or pending for blood-based methylation markers (GB1915469.9). 
All other authors declare no competing interests.


2. Urologia. 2026 Apr 29:3915603261440245. doi: 10.1177/03915603261440245. Online
 ahead of print.

Miniaturized laser enucleation of the prostate (MiLEP) is feasible and safe: 
12-month follow-up, real-life, prospective multicenter study.

Cindolo L(1), Salvaggio MD(1), Scoffone CM(2), Cracco CM(2), Kartalas IG(3), 
Bevilacqua L(3), Orecchia L(4), Castellucci R(1), Dibitetto F(5), Ferrari G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Centro Urologico Europeo CURE Group, Modena, Italy.
(2)Department of Urology, Cottolengo Hospital, Torino, Italy.
(3)Department of Urology, Istituto Clinico Beato Matteo, Vigevano, Italy.
(4)Urology Unit, Fondazione PTV Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)Urocenter, Clinica Nuova Villa Claudia, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Holmium laser enucleation of the prostate (HoLEP) is considered one 
of the option for the treatment of men with bothersome lower urinary tract 
symptoms (LUTS) related to Benign Prostatic Obstruction (BPO). HoLEP is 
performed with 26Ch instruments, which can cause urethral trauma, strictures, 
transient incontinence. Recent miniaturized 22Ch tools (MiLEP) aim to reduce 
morbidity without compromising efficacy.
METHODS: This is a prospective multicenter study on men underwent MiLEP. 
Preoperative assessment included IPSS, uroflowmetry, PSA, prostate volume and 
urinary continence. The MiLEP were performed en-bloc with early apical release. 
Follow-up assessed subjective and objective outcomes together with complications 
and patient satisfaction. Clinical success was defined as Trifecta.
RESULTS: Sixty-five men were enrolled. No major intraoperative complications 
occurred; median catheterization and hospital stay were 2 and 2 days, 
respectively. Overall complication rate was 18.4%, mostly Clavien-Dindo grade 
I-II. Late complications were urethral stricture in 4.6% and persistent stress 
incontinence in 1.5%. At 12 months, mean IPSS, IPSS QoL, Qmax, PSA significantly 
improved (all p < 0.001). Overall satisfaction was very high (96.8%). Trifecta 
was achieved in 61.5% of cases. Logistic regression identified lower pre 
operative Qmax as the only predictor of Trifecta achievement.
CONCLUSIONS: MiLEP appears feasible and safe in this preliminary series, with 
perioperative and functional outcomes consistent with enucleation-like goals. 
Significant improvements in symptom scores, flow rate and PSA were sustained at 
12 months with low morbidity and high continence preservation. Larger 
appropriate trials and longer follow up are needed to confirm our data.

DOI: 10.1177/03915603261440245
PMID: 42053386


3. Future Oncol. 2026 May;22(11):1301-1309. doi: 10.1080/14796694.2026.2651959. 
Epub 2026 Apr 29.

Real-world treatment patterns in patients with biochemical recurrence after 
local prostate cancer therapy.

McKay RR(1), Khan N(2), Shore ND(3), Chen G(2), Hlebec V(4), Srinivasan S(2), 
Spratt DE(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Whippany, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, START Carolinas Research Center, Myrtle Beach, SC, 
USA.
(4)Bayer Consumer Care AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.

AIM: Describe real-world anticancer treatment patterns in the USA among patients 
with prostate cancer (PC) who experience biochemical recurrence (BCR) following 
radical prostatectomy (RP) or radiation therapy (RT), stratified by 
prostate-specific antigen doubling time (PSA-DT).
METHODS: Retrospective, observational cohort study using the Optum® PC 
electronic medical record database (2012-2023). Patients with BCR were 
stratified into high-/low-risk groups based on PSA-DT of <12/≥12 months. A 
sensitivity analysis defined risk status using a ≤9-/>9-month cutoff.
RESULTS: The study included 2,981 patients with BCR in the RP cohort and 697 in 
the RT cohort. Median follow-up was 30.8 months (Q1-Q3: 18.1-50.8). Any 
treatment use was higher among high-risk BCR patients (RP: 67.1% vs 54.9%; RT: 
52.8% vs 28.7%). After RP, most patients received salvage RT (high-risk: 41.3%; 
low-risk: 40.7%), followed by androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) monotherapy 
(high-risk: 30.2%; low-risk: 22.8%) and ADT plus androgen receptor pathway 
inhibitor (ARPI) (high-risk: 11.9%; low-risk: 3.7%). After RT, ADT monotherapy 
(high-risk: 22.9%; low-risk: 12.3%) and ADT plus ARPI (high-risk: 16.5%; 
low-risk 4.9%) were most common. Sensitivity analyses showed similar results.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that ADT remains the predominant 
standard of care, whereas ADT plus ARPI is infrequently used, even among 
high-risk BCR patients.

Plain Language Summary: How men are treated when their prostate cancer returns 
after initial therapyProstate cancer (PC) is the most common cancer diagnosed in 
men in the USA and was the second leading cause of death in 2023. Primary 
treatment options include radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy (RT); 
however, approximately 20–50% of patients will subsequently show rising 
prostate-specific antigen–a state known as biochemical recurrence (BCR). 
Patients with BCR tend to have high risk of morbidity and mortality, with many 
patients going on to develop metastasis. Therefore, it is important to monitor 
patients for BCR, identify their risk for disease progression, and tailor 
treatments to optimize outcomes. In this study, we examined medical record data 
from a large, nationally representative US database to examine real-world 
treatment patterns in patients with PC who developed BCR after primary therapy. 
The findings of our analysis suggest that many patients with BCR are not being 
treated–even those considered at high risk for disease progression. Of the 
patients who were treated, most received salvage RT or androgen-deprivation 
therapy alone. Patients and caregivers should discuss available treatment 
options and weigh individual risks and benefits at the first sign of BCR in PC. 
The use of androgen-deprivation therapy combined with a second-generation 
androgen receptor inhibitor is infrequently selected for patients with high-risk 
BCR.

DOI: 10.1080/14796694.2026.2651959
PMID: 42052875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]