=== PubMed: reflü ===
1. Tani Girisim Radyol. 2003 Dec;9(4):471-5.

[Venous reflux: Measurement variability due to positional differences].

[Article in Turkish]

Mahmutyazicioğlu K(1), Gündoğdu S, Ozdemir H, Savranlar A, Asil K.

Author information:
(1)Zonguldak Karaelmas Universitesi Tip Fakültesi, Radyodiagnostik Anabilim 
Dali, Kozlu, Zonguldak.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the role of the subject's 
position and two different maneuvers in the reflux measurements in femoral 
veins.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Venous reflux times in the common femoral vein (CFV) and 
superficial femoral vein (SFV) were studied in 50 healthy subjects (25 women, 25 
male) aged between 22-57 years-old while the subjects were in supine and 
standing positions. Reflux was provocated only by Valsalva maneuver (VM) when 
the subject was lying down, whereas it was provocated by (1) Valsalva maneuver 
and (2) compression and release maneuver, respectively, when the subject was 
standing. Reflux times were recorded with each of the three methods.
RESULTS: Regarding CFV, a reflux time of 1 second or more was recorded in 29 
limbs (29%) only in the supine position. Of these 29 measurements, 19 were 
between 1 and 1.9 sec and 8 between 2 and 2.9 sec. When the subjects were 
examined in the standing position, the prevalence of reflux lasting more than 1 
sec substantially decreased (5%). The prevalence of reflux lasting less than 0.5 
sec was 97% with standing compression maneuver, 84% with standing VM and 27% 
with supine VM. Similarly, prevalence of reflux of longer than 0.5 sec or 1 sec 
was lower in the standing position than in the supine position in SFV. In CFV, 
mean reflux time was 1.3 sec in the supine position, whereas it was 0.7 sec and 
0.4 sec with standing compression and standing Valsalva maneuvers, respectively. 
Corresponding values in SFV were 0.5 sec, 0.3 sec and 0.2 sec, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The probability of making a false positive diagnosis of pathological 
reflux is high with supine examinations. When an examination in the supine 
position reveals a reflux time of longer than 1 second, making the patient stand 
up is expected to yield more reliable results. Compression and release maneuver, 
with its lowest false positive reflux prevalence, is the most reliable method in 
the evaluation of venous insufficiency.

PMID: 14730959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Kulak Burun Bogaz Ihtis Derg. 2003 Apr;10(4):153-8.

[Detection of gastroesophageal reflux by scintigraphy in patients with 
laryngopharyngeal symptoms and findings].

[Article in Turkish]

Pinar E(1), Oncel IS, Calli C, Atalay M.

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Otolaryngology, Atatürk Training Hospital, Izmir, Turkey. 
ercanpinar@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: We investigated the incidence of gastroesophageal reflux by 
scintigraphy in patients with laryngopharyngeal symptoms and findings.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 32 patients (14 males, 18 females; mean 
age 38 years; range 17 to 55 years) who presented with laryngopharyngeal 
complaints. All patients underwent routine ENT and head-neck examinations and 
rigid endoscopy of the larynx to determine laryngopharyngeal symptoms and 
findings. The presence of gastroesophageal reflux was sought by technetium 99m 
sulfur colloid scintigraphy.
RESULTS: The most common symptom was dysphagia (56%) followed by hoarseness 
(46%). Posterior laryngitis was the most common laryngeal finding (18 patients, 
56%). Scintigraphy revealed gastroesophageal reflux in 21 patients (66%), 14 of 
whom (67%) had posterior laryngitis.
CONCLUSION: Patients with laryngopharyngeal symptoms and findings should be 
investigated with regard to gastroesophageal reflux. Scintigraphy may be a 
method of choice in this respect.

PMID: 12941986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]