=== PubMed: tüberküloz ===
1. Kulak Burun Bogaz Ihtis Derg. 2010 Jul-Aug;20(4):184-90.

[Tuberculous lymphadenitis].

[Article in Turkish]

Sayın I(1), Bişkin S, Cakabay TT, Yazıcı ZM, Meriç A, Kayhan FT.

Author information:
(1)Bakirköy Dr. Sadi Konuk Eğitim ve Araştirma Hastanesi, Kulak Burun Boğaz 
Hastaliklari Kliniği, Istanbul, Turkey. dribrahimsayin@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: In this study, we evaluate tuberculosis (Tbc) lymphadenitis 
diagnosed patients age, gender, contact history, history of smoking, 
socioeconomic status, lymphadenitis localization, imaging techniques, fine 
needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and excisional biopsy results.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between February 2006 and February 2008 104 patients were 
operated to determine the etiology of their neck masses. Twenty-six patients (16 
females, 10 males; mean age 36.9 years; range 16 to 52 years) who were diagnosed 
as Tbc lymphadenitis according to pathology results were included in the study. 
Ear, nose and throat examinations were performed in all patients routinely. 
Hemogram, biochemical and serological tests were performed. The patients were 
evaluated with anterior-posterior chest radiographs and purified protein 
derivative (PPD) by chest diseases consultation imaging methods and FNAB was 
performed. All patients diagnosed with excisional biopsy of neck mass. During 
the operation, tissue culture and Ziehl-Neelsen method for staining was 
prepared.
RESULTS: Out of 26 patients eight had a history of contact with Tbc. One person 
had previously lung Tbc. Six patients had previously received treatment because 
of Tbc lymphadenitis, but didn't complete the treatment. Neck ultrasonography 
and neck computed tomography detected a solid mass in 16 patients and cystic 
mass in 10 patients. The 24 patients were evaluated as positive PPD (>10 mm). 
None of the patients had an association between active pulmonary Tbc and Tbc 
lymphadenitis.
CONCLUSION: Suspicion is the most important step in the diagnosis of Tbc 
lymphadenitis. In patients with low socioeconomic status, previous Tbc contact, 
tabacco usage, suppressed immune system, and particularly in those with drainage 
from neck masses, Tbc lymphadenitis should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis.

PMID: 20626326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Tuberk Toraks. 2003;51(1):94-9.

[Tuberculosis prophylaxis].

[Article in Turkish]

Güler ZM(1), Dursun AB.

Author information:
(1)Atatürk Chest Diseaes and Toracic Surgery Educational Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey.

Besides definition and treatment of index cases, prophylaxis plays an important 
role in battling tuberculosis that is still health problem in developing 
countries. But, in clinical practice, there are differences about prophylaxis 
between countries and even in our country. Approaches to prophylaxis of 
developed countries and current situation of our country were looked over for 
this purpose.

PMID: 15100912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Tuberk Toraks. 2003;51(4):424-31.

[Osteoarticular tuberculosis].

[Article in Turkish]

Bodur H(1), Bodur H, Akinci E, Yilmaz O, Borman P, Tanyolaç O, Kulaçoğlu S, 
Seçkin S, Biçimoğlu A.

Author information:
(1)Numune Research and Educational Centre, Clinical Bacteriology and Infectious 
Diseases, 06590 Cebeci, Ankara, Turkey. hbodur2001@mynet.com

Tuberculosis (Tbc) remains as a major public health problem in the world. 
Extrapulmonary Tbc is gaining importance and it accounts for approximately 15% 
of all new cases. Osteoarticular Tbc is an infrequent form of the disease, 
accounting for 1-5% of all cases. Joints are uncommon site of infection; 
therefore, peripheral Tbc is considered rare. Tbc arthritis are usually 
monoarticular but oligoarticular involvement are also reported. We presented 
here four cases with osteoarticular Tbc and reviewed the literature.

PMID: 15143392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Tuberk Toraks. 2025 Mar;73(1):77-79. doi: 10.5578/tt.202501992.

Hairy vocal cords and hemoptysis.

Şimşek Veske N(1), Sökücü SN(1), Günlüoğlu G(1), Altin S(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Chest Disease, University of Health Sciences Yedikule Chest 
Diseases and Thorasic Surgery Training and Research Hospital, İstanbul, Türkiye.

ABSTRACT Hairy vocal cords and hemoptysis A 71-year-old patient with hemoptysis, 
history of pulmonary tuberculosis, laryngeal cancer, and smoking habit underwent 
fiberoptic bronchoscopy. No endobronchial lesions were detected, but hair 
structures were seen on the vocal cords. Klebsiella oxytoca was grown in the 
non-specific culture of the lavage. Filamentous bacteria suggestive of 
actinomyces were also seen in the cytology. These bacteria, seen in the normal 
flora of the oropharynx, may be responsible for lung infection in individuals 
with weakened immune systems and concomitant diseases. In elderly patients with 
a history of pulmonary tuberculosis and cancer, as in our patient, hairs 
developing on the vocal cords as a complication of laryngeal surgery may cause 
food residues and secretions to accumulate on the hair surface and increase 
microaspirations. We would like to remind you that these microaspirations may 
affect the lower respiratory tract defense mechanisms and lead to clinical 
problems such as lung infection, lung abscess, aspiration pneumonia and 
hemoptysis in people with comorbid diseases. Key words: Complication; hair; 
hemoptysis; larynx cancer ÖZ Kıllı vokal kord ve hemoptiz Yetmiş bir yaşında, 
hemoptizisi bulunan ve özgeçmişinde akciğer tüberkülozu ve larenks kanseri 
öyküsü bulunan, sigara içme alışkanlığına sahip hastaya fiberoptik bronkoskopi 
uygulandı. Endobronşiyal lezyon saptanmadı, ancak vokal kordlar üzerinde kıl 
yapıları izlendi. Lavajda non-spesifik kültürde Klebsiella oxytoca üremesi 
tespit edildi. Sitolojisinde ise aktinomiçesi düşündüren filamentöz bakteriler 
gözlendi. Orofarenkste normal florada bulunan bu bakteriler, immün sistemi zayıf 
ve komorbid hastalığı olan kişilerde pulmoner enfeksiyona yol açabilir. Bizim 
hastamızdaki gibi geçmişte tüberküloz ve kanser öyküsü bulunan, ileri yaşta olan 
hastalarda, larenks cerrahisi sonucu vokal kordlarda gelişen kıllar, kıl 
yüzeyinde biriken yiyecek artıkları ve sekresyonlar ile artan 
mikroaspirasyonlara neden olabilir. Bu mikroaspirasyonlar, alt solunum yolu 
savunma mekanizmalarını etkileyerek, komorbid hastalığı olan kişilerde akciğer 
enfeksiyonu, akciğer apsesi, aspirasyon pnömonisi gibi klinik sorunlara yol 
açabilir ve bunların sonucu olarak hemoptiziye neden olabilice- ğini belirtmek 
istiyoruz. Anahtar kelimeler: Komplikasyon; kıl; hemoptizi; larenks kanseri

DOI: 10.5578/tt.202501992
PMCID: PMC11977900
PMID: 40145826

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest to 
declare.


5. Tuberk Toraks. 2019 Sep;67(3):236-238. doi: 10.5578/tt.68451.

[Tuberculous tenosynovitis in wrist flexor tendons].

[Article in Turkish]

Demir M(1), Küçük L(2), Mermut G(1), Pullukçu H(1), Çavuşoğlu C(3), Işıkgöz 
Taşbakan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege 
University, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, 
Izmir, Turkey.

DOI: 10.5578/tt.68451
PMID: 31709958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]